How are you, Donald? Well, thank you, Lester, and thanks to Hofstra for hosting us. The central question in this election is really what kind of country we want to be and what kind of future we'll build together. Today is my granddaughter's second birthday, so I think about this a lot. First, we have to build an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. That means we need new jobs, good jobs, with rising incomes. I want us to invest in you. I want us to invest in your future. That means jobs in infrastructure, in advanced manufacturing, innovation and technology, clean, renewable energy, and small business, because most of the new jobs will come from small business. We also have to make the economy fairer. That starts with raising the national minimum wage and also guarantee, finally, equal pay for women's work. I also want to see more companies do profit-sharing. If you help create the profits, you should be able to share in them, not just the executives at the top. And I want us to do more to support people who are struggling to balance family and work. I've heard from so many of you about the difficult choices you face and the stresses that you're under. So let's have paid family leave, earned sick days. Let's be sure we have affordable child care and debt-free college. How are we going to do it? We're going to do it by having the wealthy pay their fair share and close the corporate loopholes. Finally, we tonight are on the stage together, Donald Trump and I. Donald, it's good to be with you. We're going to have a debate where we are talking about the important issues facing our country. You have to judge us, who can shoulder the immense, awesome responsibilities of the presidency, who can put into action the plans that will make your life better. I hope that I will be able to earn your vote on November 8th. Well, I think that trade is an important issue. Of course, we are 5 percent of the world's population; we have to trade with the other 95 percent. And we need to have smart, fair trade deals. We also, though, need to have a tax system that rewards work and not just financial transactions. And the kind of plan that Donald has put forth would be trickle-down economics all over again. In fact, it would be the most extreme version, the biggest tax cuts for the top percent of the people in this country than we've ever had. I call it trumped-up trickle-down, because that's exactly what it would be. That is not how we grow the economy. We just have a different view about what's best for growing the economy, how we make investments that will actually produce jobs and rising incomes. I think we come at it from somewhat different perspectives. I understand that. You know, Donald was very fortunate in his life, and that's all to his benefit. He started his business with $14 million, borrowed from his father, and he really believes that the more you help wealthy people, the better off we'll be and that everything will work out from there. I don't buy that. I have a different experience. My father was a small-businessman. He worked really hard. He printed drapery fabrics on long tables, where he pulled out those fabrics and he went down with a silkscreen and dumped the paint in and took the squeegee and kept going. And so what I believe is the more we can do for the middle class, the more we can invest in you, your education, your skills, your future, the better we will be off and the better we'll grow. That's the kind of economy I want us to see again. Well, let's stop for a second and remember where we were eight years ago. We had the worst financial crisis, the Great Recession, the worst since the 1930s. That was in large part because of tax policies that slashed taxes on the wealthy, failed to invest in the middle class, took their eyes off of Wall Street, and created a perfect storm. In fact, Donald was one of the people who rooted for the housing crisis. He said, back in 2006, "Gee, I hope it does collapse, because then I can go in and buy some and make some money." Well, it did collapse. Nine million people -- nine million people lost their jobs. Five million people lost their homes. And $13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out. Now, we have come back from that abyss. And it has not been easy. So we're now on the precipice of having a potentially much better economy, but the last thing we need to do is to go back to the policies that failed us in the first place. Independent experts have looked at what I've proposed and looked at what Donald's proposed, and basically they've said this, that if his tax plan, which would blow up the debt by over $5 trillion and would in some instances disadvantage middle-class families compared to the wealthy, were to go into effect, we would lose 3.5 million jobs and maybe have another recession. They've looked at my plans and they've said, OK, if we can do this, and I intend to get it done, we will have 10 million more new jobs, because we will be making investments where we can grow the economy. Take clean energy. Some country is going to be the clean- energy superpower of the 21st century. Donald thinks that climate change is a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese. I think it's real. I think science is real. And I think it's important that we grip this and deal with it, both at home and abroad. And here's what we can do. We can deploy a half a billion more solar panels. We can have enough clean energy to power every home. We can build a new modern electric grid. That's a lot of jobs; that's a lot of new economic activity. So I've tried to be very specific about what we can and should do, and I am determined that we're going to get the economy really moving again, building on the progress we've made over the last eight years, but never going back to what got us in trouble in the first place. Well, actually... Well, actually, I have thought about this quite a bit. And I have -- well, not quite that long. I think my husband did a pretty good job in the 1990s. I think a lot about what worked and how we can make it work again... ... million new jobs, a balanced budget... Incomes went up for everybody. Manufacturing jobs went up also in the 1990s, if we're actually going to look at the facts. When I was in the Senate, I had a number of trade deals that came before me, and I held them all to the same test. Will they create jobs in America? Will they raise incomes in America? And are they good for our national security? Some of them I voted for. The biggest one, a multinational one known as CAFTA, I voted against. And because I hold the same standards as I look at all of these trade deals. But let's not assume that trade is the only challenge we have in the economy. I think it is a part of it, and I've said what I'm going to do. I'm going to have a special prosecutor. We're going to enforce the trade deals we have, and we're going to hold people accountable. When I was secretary of state, we actually increased American exports globally 30 percent. We increased them to China 50 percent. So I know how to really work to get new jobs and to get exports that helped to create more new jobs. Well, I've been a senator, Donald... And I have been a secretary of state... And I have done a lot... Well, that's your opinion. That is your opinion. Well, that is just not accurate. I was against it once it was finally negotiated and the terms were laid out. I wrote about that in... No. Well, Donald, I know you live in your own reality, but that is not the facts. The facts are -- I did say I hoped it would be a good deal, but when it was negotiated... ... which I was not responsible for, I concluded it wasn't. I wrote about that in my book... ... before you even announced. Look, there are differences... There are... There are different views about what's good for our country, our economy, and our leadership in the world. And I think it's important to look at what we need to do to get the economy going again. That's why I said new jobs with rising incomes, investments, not in more tax cuts that would add $5 trillion to the debt. But in -- oh, but I do. In fact, I have written a book about it. It's called "Stronger Together." You can pick it up tomorrow at a bookstore... ... or at an airport near you. But it's because I see this -- we need to have strong growth, fair growth, sustained growth. We also have to look at how we help families balance the responsibilities at home and the responsibilities at business. So we have a very robust set of plans. And people have looked at both of our plans, have concluded that mine would create 10 million jobs and yours would lose us 3.5 million jobs, and explode the debt which would have a recession. That can't -- that can't be left to stand. I kind of assumed that there would be a lot of these charges and claims, and so... So we have taken the home page of my website, HillaryClinton.com, and we've turned it into a fact-checker. So if you want to see in real-time what the facts are, please go and take a look. Because what I have proposed... ... would not add a penny to the debt, and your plans would add $5 trillion to the debt. What I have proposed would cut regulations and streamline them for small businesses. What I have proposed would be paid for by raising taxes on the wealthy, because they have made all the gains in the economy. And I think it's time that the wealthy and corporations paid their fair share to support this country. Well, at least I have a plan to fight ISIS. No, we're not. No, we're not. That's a -- that's -- go to the -- please, fact checkers, get to work. I have a feeling that by, the end of this evening, I'm going to be blamed for everything that's ever happened. Why not? Yeah, why not? You know, just join the debate by saying more crazy things. Now, let me say this, it is absolutely the case... Yeah, well, let's start the clock again, Lester. We've looked at your tax proposals. I don't see changes in the corporate tax rates or the kinds of proposals you're referring to that would cause the repatriation, bringing back of money that's stranded overseas. I happen to support that. I happen to -- I happen to support that in a way that will actually work to our benefit. But when I look at what you have proposed, you have what is called now the Trump loophole, because it would so advantage you and the business you do. You've proposed an approach that has a... ... $4 billion tax benefit for your family. And when you look at what you are proposing... ... it is... ... as I said, trumped-up trickle-down. Trickle-down did not work. It got us into the mess we were in, in 2008 and 2009. Slashing taxes on the wealthy hasn't worked. And a lot of really smart, wealthy people know that. And they are saying, hey, we need to do more to make the contributions we should be making to rebuild the middle class. I don't think top-down works in America. I think building the middle class, investing in the middle class, making college debt-free so more young people can get their education, helping people refinance their -- their debt from college at a lower rate. Those are the kinds of things that will really boost the economy. Broad-based, inclusive growth is what we need in America, not more advantages for people at the very top. Well, I think you've seen another example of bait-and- switch here. For 40 years, everyone running for president has released their tax returns. You can go and see nearly, I think, 39, 40 years of our tax returns, but everyone has done it. We know the IRS has made clear there is no prohibition on releasing it when you're under audit. So you've got to ask yourself, why won't he release his tax returns? And I think there may be a couple of reasons. First, maybe he's not as rich as he says he is. Second, maybe he's not as charitable as he claims to be. Third, we don't know all of his business dealings, but we have been told through investigative reporting that he owes about $650 million to Wall Street and foreign banks. Or maybe he doesn't want the American people, all of you watching tonight, to know that he's paid nothing in federal taxes, because the only years that anybody's ever seen were a couple of years when he had to turn them over to state authorities when he was trying to get a casino license, and they showed he didn't pay any federal income tax. So if he's paid zero, that means zero for troops, zero for vets, zero for schools or health. And I think probably he's not all that enthusiastic about having the rest of our country see what the real reasons are, because it must be something really important, even terrible, that he's trying to hide. And the financial disclosure statements, they don't give you the tax rate. They don't give you all the details that tax returns would. And it just seems to me that this is something that the American people deserve to see. And I have no reason to believe that he's ever going to release his tax returns, because there's something he's hiding. And we'll guess. We'll keep guessing at what it might be that he's hiding. But I think the question is, were he ever to get near the White House, what would be those conflicts? Who does he owe money to? Well, he owes you the answers to that, and he should provide them. I do. You know, I made a mistake using a private e- mail. TRUMP: And if I had to do it over again, I would, obviously, do it differently. But I'm not going to make any excuses. It was a mistake, and I take responsibility for that. And maybe because you haven't paid any federal income tax for a lot of years. And the other thing I think is importantäó_ ... is if your -- if your main claim to be president of the United States is your business, then I think we should talk about that. You know, your campaign manager said that you built a lot of businesses on the backs of little guys. And, indeed, I have met a lot of the people who were stiffed by you and your businesses, Donald. I've met dishwashers, painters, architects, glass installers, marble installers, drapery installers, like my dad was, who you refused to pay when they finished the work that you asked them to do. We have an architect in the audience who designed one of your clubhouses at one of your golf courses. It's a beautiful facility. It immediately was put to use. And you wouldn't pay what the man needed to be paid, what he was charging you to do... Well, to... Do the thousands of people that you have stiffed over the course of your business not deserve some kind of apology from someone who has taken their labor, taken the goods that they produced, and then refused to pay them? I can only say that I'm certainly relieved that my late father never did business with you. He provided a good middle-class life for us, but the people he worked for, he expected the bargain to be kept on both sides. And when we talk about your business, you've taken business bankruptcy six times. There are a lot of great businesspeople that have never taken bankruptcy once. You call yourself the King of Debt. You talk about leverage. You even at one time suggested that you would try to negotiate down the national debt of the United States. Well, sometimes there's not a direct transfer of skills from business to government, but sometimes what happened in business would be really bad for government. And we need to be very clear about that. Well, you're right. Race remains a significant challenge in our country. Unfortunately, race still determines too much, often determines where people live, determines what kind of education in their public schools they can get, and, yes, it determines how they're treated in the criminal justice system. We've just seen those two tragic examples in both Tulsa and Charlotte. And we've got to do several things at the same time. We have to restore trust between communities and the police. We have to work to make sure that our police are using the best training, the best techniques, that they're well prepared to use force only when necessary. Everyone should be respected by the law, and everyone should respect the law. Right now, that's not the case in a lot of our neighborhoods. So I have, ever since the first day of my campaign, called for criminal justice reform. I've laid out a platform that I think would begin to remedy some of the problems we have in the criminal justice system. But we also have to recognize, in addition to the challenges that we face with policing, there are so many good, brave police officers who equally want reform. So we have to bring communities together in order to begin working on that as a mutual goal. And we've got to get guns out of the hands of people who should not have them. The gun epidemic is the leading cause of death of young African- American men, more than the next nine causes put together. So we have to do two things, as I said. We have to restore trust. We have to work with the police. We have to make sure they respect the communities and the communities respect them. And we have to tackle the plague of gun violence, which is a big contributor to a lot of the problems that we're seeing today. Well, I've heard -- I've heard Donald say this at his rallies, and it's really unfortunate that he paints such a dire negative picture of black communities in our country. You know, the vibrancy of the black church, the black businesses that employ so many people, the opportunities that so many families are working to provide for their kids. There's a lot that we should be proud of and we should be supporting and lifting up. But we do always have to make sure we keep people safe. There are the right ways of doing it, and then there are ways that are ineffective. Stop-and-frisk was found to be unconstitutional and, in part, because it was ineffective. It did not do what it needed to do. Now, I believe in community policing. And, in fact, violent crime is one-half of what it was in 1991. Property crime is down 40 percent. We just don't want to see it creep back up. We've had 25 years of very good cooperation. But there were some problems, some unintended consequences. Too many young African-American and Latino men ended up in jail for nonviolent offenses. And it's just a fact that if you're a young African-American man and you do the same thing as a young white man, you are more likely to be arrested, charged, convicted, and incarcerated. So we've got to address the systemic racism in our criminal justice system. We cannot just say law and order. We have to say -- we have to come forward with a plan that is going to divert people from the criminal justice system, deal with mandatory minimum sentences, which have put too many people away for too long for doing too little. We need to have more second chance programs. I'm glad that we're ending private prisons in the federal system; I want to see them ended in the state system. You shouldn't have a profit motivation to fill prison cells with young Americans. So there are some positive ways we can work on this. And I believe strongly that commonsense gun safety measures would assist us. Right now -- and this is something Donald has supported, along with the gun lobby -- right now, we've got too many military- style weapons on the streets. In a lot of places, our police are outgunned. We need comprehensive background checks, and we need to keep guns out of the hands of those who will do harm. And we finally need to pass a prohibition on anyone who's on the terrorist watch list from being able to buy a gun in our country. If you're too dangerous to fly, you are too dangerous to buy a gun. So there are things we can do, and we ought to do it in a bipartisan way. Lester, I think implicit bias is a problem for everyone, not just police. I think, unfortunately, too many of us in our great country jump to conclusions about each other. And therefore, I think we need all of us to be asking hard questions about, you know, why am I feeling this way? But when it comes to policing, since it can have literally fatal consequences, I have said, in my first budget, we would put money into that budget to help us deal with implicit bias by retraining a lot of our police officers. I've met with a group of very distinguished, experienced police chiefs a few weeks ago. They admit it's an issue. They've got a lot of concerns. Mental health is one of the biggest concerns, because now police are having to handle a lot of really difficult mental health problems on the street. They want support, they want more training, they want more assistance. And I think the federal government could be in a position where we would offer and provide that. Well, it's also fair to say, if we're going to talk about mayors, that under the current mayor, crime has continued to drop, including murders. So there is... No, I'm not. New York -- New York has done an excellent job. And I give credit -- I give credit across the board going back two mayors, two police chiefs, because it has worked. And other communities need to come together to do what will work, as well. Look, one murder is too many. But it is important that we learn about what has been effective. And not go to things that sound good that really did not have the kind of impact that we would want. Who disagrees with keeping neighborhoods safe? But let's also add, no one should disagree about respecting the rights of young men who live in those neighborhoods. And so we need to do a better job of working, again, with the communities, faith communities, business communities, as well as the police to try to deal with this problem. Well, I -- I do think... I think -- I think -- I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate. And, yes, I did. And you know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be president. And I think that's a good thing. Well, just listen to what you heard. And clearly, as Donald just admitted, he knew he was going to stand on this debate stage, and Lester Holt was going to be asking us questions, so he tried to put the whole racist birther lie to bed. But it can't be dismissed that easily. He has really started his political activity based on this racist lie that our first black president was not an American citizen. There was absolutely no evidence for it, but he persisted, he persisted year after year, because some of his supporters, people that he was trying to bring into his fold, apparently believed it or wanted to believe it. But, remember, Donald started his career back in 1973 being sued by the Justice Department for racial discrimination because he would not rent apartments in one of his developments to African-Americans, and he made sure that the people who worked for him understood that was the policy. He actually was sued twice by the Justice Department. So he has a long record of engaging in racist behavior. And the birther lie was a very hurtful one. You know, Barack Obama is a man of great dignity. And I could tell how much it bothered him and annoyed him that this was being touted and used against him. But I like to remember what Michelle Obama said in her amazing speech at our Democratic National Convention: When they go low, we go high. And Barack Obama went high, despite Donald Trump's best efforts to bring him down. Well, I think cyber security, cyber warfare will be one of the biggest challenges facing the next president, because clearly we're facing at this point two different kinds of adversaries. There are the independent hacking groups that do it mostly for commercial reasons to try to steal information that they can use to make money. But increasingly, we are seeing cyber attacks coming from states, organs of states. The most recent and troubling of these has been Russia. There's no doubt now that Russia has used cyber attacks against all kinds of organizations in our country, and I am deeply concerned about this. I know Donald's very praiseworthy of Vladimir Putin, but Putin is playing a really... ... tough, long game here. And one of the things he's done is to let loose cyber attackers to hack into government files, to hack into personal files, hack into the Democratic National Committee. And we recently have learned that, you know, that this is one of their preferred methods of trying to wreak havoc and collect information. We need to make it very clear -- whether it's Russia, China, Iran or anybody else -- the United States has much greater capacity. And we are not going to sit idly by and permit state actors to go after our information, our private-sector information or our public-sector information. And we're going to have to make it clear that we don't want to use the kinds of tools that we have. We don't want to engage in a different kind of warfare. But we will defend the citizens of this country. And the Russians need to understand that. I think they've been treating it as almost a probing, how far would we go, how much would we do. And that's why I was so -- I was so shocked when Donald publicly invited Putin to hack into Americans. That is just unacceptable. It's one of the reasons why 50 national security officials who served in Republican information -- in administrations... ... have said that Donald is unfit to be the commander- in-chief. It's comments like that that really worry people who understand the threats that we face. Well, I think there are a number of issues that we should be addressing. I have put forth a plan to defeat ISIS. It does involve going after them online. I think we need to do much more with our tech companies to prevent ISIS and their operatives from being able to use the Internet to radicalize, even direct people in our country and Europe and elsewhere. But we also have to intensify our air strikes against ISIS and eventually support our Arab and Kurdish partners to be able to actually take out ISIS in Raqqa, end their claim of being a Caliphate. We're making progress. Our military is assisting in Iraq. And we're hoping that within the year we'll be able to push ISIS out of Iraq and then, you know, really squeeze them in Syria. But we have to be cognizant of the fact that they've had foreign fighters coming to volunteer for them, foreign money, foreign weapons, so we have to make this the top priority. And I would also do everything possible to take out their leadership. I was involved in a number of efforts to take out Al Qaida leadership when I was secretary of state, including, of course, taking out bin Laden. And I think we need to go after Baghdadi, as well, make that one of our organizing principles. Because we've got to defeat ISIS, and we've got to do everything we can to disrupt their propaganda efforts online. Well, I hope the fact-checkers are turning up the volume and really working hard. Donald supported the invasion of Iraq. That is absolutely proved over and over again. He actually advocated for the actions we took in Libya and urged that Gadhafi be taken out, after actually doing some business with him one time. But the larger point -- and he says this constantly -- is George W. Bush made the agreement about when American troops would leave Iraq, not Barack Obama. And the only way that American troops could have stayed in Iraq is to get an agreement from the then-Iraqi government that would have protected our troops, and the Iraqi government would not give that. But let's talk about the question you asked, Lester. The question you asked is, what do we do here in the United States? That's the most important part of this. How do we prevent attacks? How do we protect our people? And I think we've got to have an intelligence surge, where we are looking for every scrap of information. I was so proud of law enforcement in New York, in Minnesota, in New Jersey. You know, they responded so quickly, so professionally to the attacks that occurred by Rahami. And they brought him down. And we may find out more information because he is still alive, which may prove to be an intelligence benefit. So we've got to do everything we can to vacuum up intelligence from Europe, from the Middle East. That means we've got to work more closely with our allies, and that's something that Donald has been very dismissive of. We're working with NATO, the longest military alliance in the history of the world, to really turn our attention to terrorism. We're working with our friends in the Middle East, many of which, as you know, are Muslim majority nations. Donald has consistently insulted Muslims abroad, Muslims at home, when we need to be cooperating with Muslim nations and with the American Muslim community. They're on the front lines. They can provide information to us that we might not get anywhere else. They need to have close working cooperation with law enforcement in these communities, not be alienated and pushed away as some of Donald's rhetoric, unfortunately, has led to. Lester, we've covered... We've covered this ground. Whew, OK. Let's talk about two important issues that were briefly mentioned by Donald, first, NATO. You know, NATO as a military alliance has something called Article 5, and basically it says this: An attack on one is an attack on all. And you know the only time it's ever been invoked? After 9/11, when the 28 nations of NATO said that they would go to Afghanistan with us to fight terrorism, something that they still are doing by our side. With respect to Iran, when I became secretary of state, Iran was weeks away from having enough nuclear material to form a bomb. They had mastered the nuclear fuel cycle under the Bush administration. They had built covert facilities. They had stocked them with centrifuges that were whirling away. And we had sanctioned them. I voted for every sanction against Iran when I was in the Senate, but it wasn't enough. So I spent a year-and-a-half putting together a coalition that included Russia and China to impose the toughest sanctions on Iran. And we did drive them to the negotiating table. And my successor, John Kerry, and President Obama got a deal that put a lid on Iran's nuclear program without firing a single shot. That's diplomacy. That's coalition-building. That's working with other nations. The other day, I saw Donald saying that there were some Iranian sailors on a ship in the waters off of Iran, and they were taunting American sailors who were on a nearby ship. He said, you know, if they taunted our sailors, I'd blow them out of the water and start another war. That's not good judgment. That is not the right temperament to be commander-in- chief, to be taunted. And the worst part... ... of what we heard Donald say has been about nuclear weapons. He has said repeatedly that he didn't care if other nations got nuclear weapons, Japan, South Korea, even Saudi Arabia. It has been the policy of the United States, Democrats and Republicans, to do everything we could to reduce the proliferation of nuclear weapons. He even said, well, you know, if there were nuclear war in East Asia, well, you know, that's fine... ... have a good time, folks. And, in fact, his cavalier attitude about nuclear weapons is so deeply troubling. That is the number-one threat we face in the world. And it becomes particularly threatening if terrorists ever get their hands on any nuclear material. So a man who can be provoked by a tweet should not have his fingers anywhere near the nuclear codes, as far as I think anyone with any sense about this should be concerned. It's a good one, though. It well describes the problem. Well, let me -- let me start by saying, words matter. Words matter when you run for president. And they really matter when you are president. And I want to reassure our allies in Japan and South Korea and elsewhere that we have mutual defense treaties and we will honor them. It is essential that America's word be good. And so I know that this campaign has caused some questioning and worries on the part of many leaders across the globe. I've talked with a number of them. But I want to -- on behalf of myself, and I think on behalf of a majority of the American people, say that, you know, our word is good. It's also important that we look at the entire global situation. There's no doubt that we have other problems with Iran. But personally, I'd rather deal with the other problems having put that lid on their nuclear program than still to be facing that. And Donald never tells you what he would do. Would he have started a war? Would he have bombed Iran? If he's going to criticize a deal that has been very successful in giving us access to Iranian facilities that we never had before, then he should tell us what his alternative would be. But it's like his plan to defeat ISIS. He says it's a secret plan, but the only secret is that he has no plan. So we need to be more precise in how we talk about these issues. People around the word follow our presidential campaigns so closely, trying to get hints about what we will do. Can they rely on us? Are we going to lead the world with strength and in accordance with our values? That's what I intend to do. I intend to be a leader of our country that people can count on, both here at home and around the world, to make decisions that will further peace and prosperity, but also stand up to bullies, whether they're abroad or at home. We cannot let those who would try to destabilize the world to interfere with American interests and security... ... to be given any opportunities at all. Well, as soon as he travels to 112 countries and negotiates a peace deal, a cease-fire, a release of dissidents, an opening of new opportunities in nations around the world, or even spends 11 hours testifying in front of a congressional committee, he can talk to me about stamina. Well, one thing. One thing, Lester. You know, he tried to switch from looks to stamina. But this is a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs, and someone who has said pregnancy is an inconvenience to employers, who has said... .... women don't deserve equal pay unless they do as good a job as men. And one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest. He loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them. And he called this woman "Miss Piggy." Then he called her "Miss Housekeeping," because she was Latina. Donald, she has a name. Her name is Alicia Machado. And she has become a U.S. citizen, and you can bet... ... she's going to vote this November. Well, I support our democracy. And sometimes you win, sometimes you lose. But I certainly will support the outcome of this election. And I know Donald's trying very hard to plant doubts about it, but I hope the people out there understand: This election's really up to you. It's not about us so much as it is about you and your families and the kind of country and future you want. So I sure hope you will get out and vote as though your future depended on it, because I think it does. Well, thank you. Are you a teacher? Yes, I think that that's a very good question, because I've heard from lots of teachers and parents about some of their concerns about some of the things that are being said and done in this campaign. And I think it is very important for us to make clear to our children that our country really is great because we're good. And we are going to respect one another, lift each other up. We are going to be looking for ways to celebrate our diversity, and we are going to try to reach out to every boy and girl, as well as every adult, to bring them in to working on behalf of our country. I have a very positive and optimistic view about what we can do together. That's why the slogan of my campaign is "Stronger Together," because I think if we work together, if we overcome the divisiveness that sometimes sets Americans against one another, and instead we make some big goals -- and I've set forth some big goals, getting the economy to work for everyone, not just those at the top, making sure that we have the best education system from preschool through college and making it affordable, and so much else. If we set those goals and we go together to try to achieve them, there's nothing in my opinion that America can't do. So that's why I hope that we will come together in this campaign. Obviously, I'm hoping to earn your vote, I'm hoping to be elected in November, and I can promise you, I will work with every American. I want to be the president for all Americans, regardless of your political beliefs, where you come from, what you look like, your religion. I want us to heal our country and bring it together because that's, I think, the best way for us to get the future that our children and our grandchildren deserve.  Well, like everyone else, I've spent a lot of time thinking over the last 48 hours about what we heard and saw. You know, with prior Republican nominees for president, I disagreed with them on politics, policies, principles, but I never questioned their fitness to serve. Donald Trump is different. I said starting back in June that he was not fit to be president and commander-in-chief. And many Republicans and independents have said the same thing. What we all saw and heard on Friday was Donald talking about women, what he thinks about women, what he does to women. And he has said that the video doesn't represent who he is. But I think it's clear to anyone who heard it that it represents exactly who he is. Because we've seen this throughout the campaign. We have seen him insult women. We've seen him rate women on their appearance, ranking them from one to ten. We've seen him embarrass women on TV and on Twitter. We saw him after the first debate spend nearly a week denigrating a former Miss Universe in the harshest, most personal terms. So, yes, this is who Donald Trump is. But it's not only women, and it's not only this video that raises questions about his fitness to be our president, because he has also targeted immigrants, African- Americans, Latinos, people with disabilities, POWs, Muslims, and so many others. So this is who Donald Trump is. And the question for us, the question our country must answer is that this is not who we are. That's why -- to go back to your question -- I want to send a message -- we all should -- to every boy and girl and, indeed, to the entire world that America already is great, but we are great because we are good, and we will respect one another, and we will work with one another, and we will celebrate our diversity.  These are very important values to me, because this is the America that I know and love. And I can pledge to you tonight that this is the America that I will serve if I'm so fortunate enough to become your president.  Well, first, let me start by saying that so much of what he's just said is not right, but he gets to run his campaign any way he chooses. He gets to decide what he wants to talk about. Instead of answering people's questions, talking about our agenda, laying out the plans that we have that we think can make a better life and a better country, that's his choice. When I hear something like that, I am reminded of what my friend, Michelle Obama, advised us all: When they go low, you go high. And, look, if this were just about one video, maybe what he's saying tonight would be understandable, but everyone can draw their own conclusions at this point about whether or not the man in the video or the man on the stage respects women. But he never apologizes for anything to anyone.  He never apologized to Mr. and Mrs. Khan, the Gold Star family whose son, Captain Khan, died in the line of duty in Iraq. And Donald insulted and attacked them for weeks over their religion. He never apologized to the distinguished federal judge who was born in Indiana, but Donald said he couldn't be trusted to be a judge because his parents were, quote, "Mexican." He never apologized to the reporter that he mimicked and mocked on national television and our children were watching. And he never apologized for the racist lie that President Obama was not born in the United States of America. He owes the president an apology, he owes our country an apology, and he needs to take responsibility for his actions and his words.  ... because everything he just said is absolutely false, but I'm not surprised.  In the first debateƒ ... I told people that it would be impossible to be fact-checking Donald all the time. I'd never get to talk about anything I want to do and how we're going to really make lives better for people. So, once again, go to HillaryClinton.com. We have literally Trump -- you can fact check him in real time. Last time at the first debate, we had millions of people fact checking, so I expect we'll have millions more fact checking, because, you know, it is -- it's just awfully good that someone with the temperament of Donald Trump is not in charge of the law in our country.  Well, Martha, first, let me say -- and I've said before, but I'll repeat it, because I want everyone to hear it -- that was a mistake, and I take responsibility for using a personal e-mail account. Obviously, if I were to do it over again, I would not. I'm not making any excuses. It was a mistake. And I am very sorry about that. But I think it's also important to point out where there are some misleading accusations from critics and others. After a year-long investigation, there is no evidence that anyone hacked the server I was using and there is no evidence that anyone can point to at all -- anyone who says otherwise has no basis -- that any classified material ended up in the wrong hands. I take classified materials very seriously and always have. When I was on the Senate Armed Services Committee, I was privy to a lot of classified material. Obviously, as secretary of state, I had some of the most important secrets that we possess, such as going after bin Laden. So I am very committed to taking classified information seriously. And as I said, there is no evidence that any classified information ended up in the wrong hands.  Look, it's just not true. And so please, go to...  It was personal e-mails, not official.  Not -- well, we turned over 35,000, so...  Yes, that's true, I didn't.  I didn't in the first debate, and I'm going to try not to in this debate, because I'd like to get to the questions that the people have brought here tonight to talk to us about.  OK, Donald. I know you're into big diversion tonight, anything to avoid talking about your campaign and the way it's exploding and the way Republicans are leaving you. But let's at least focus...  ... on some of the issues that people care about tonight. Let's get to their questions. If he wants to start, he can start. No, go ahead, Donald.  Well, I think Donald was about to say he's going to solve it by repealing it and getting rid of the Affordable Care Act. And I'm going to fix it, because I agree with you. Premiums have gotten too high. Copays, deductibles, prescription drug costs, and I've laid out a series of actions that we can take to try to get those costs down. But here's what I don't want people to forget when we're talking about reining in the costs, which has to be the highest priority of the next president, when the Affordable Care Act passed, it wasn't just that 20 million got insurance who didn't have it before. But that in and of itself was a good thing. I meet these people all the time, and they tell me what a difference having that insurance meant to them and their families. But everybody else, the 170 million of us who get health insurance through our employees got big benefits. Number one, insurance companies can't deny you coverage because of a pre-existing condition. Number two, no lifetime limits, which is a big deal if you have serious health problems. Number three, women can't be charged more than men for our health insurance, which is the way it used to be before the Affordable Care Act. Number four, if you're under 26, and your parents have a policy, you can be on that policy until the age of 26, something that didn't happen before. So I want very much to save what works and is good about the Affordable Care Act. But we've got to get costs down. We've got to provide additional help to small businesses so that they can afford to provide health insurance. But if we repeal it, as Donald has proposed, and start over again, all of those benefits I just mentioned are lost to everybody, not just people who get their health insurance on the exchange. And then we would have to start all over again. Right now, we are at 90 percent health insurance coverage. That's the highest we've ever been in our country.  So I want us to get to 100 percent, but get costs down and keep quality up.  No, I mean, he clarified what he meant. And it's very clear. Look, we are in a situation in our country where if we were to start all over again, we might come up with a different system. But we have an employer-based system. That's where the vast majority of people get their health care. And the Affordable Care Act was meant to try to fill the gap between people who were too poor and couldn't put together any resources to afford health care, namely people on Medicaid. Obviously, Medicare, which is a single-payer system, which takes care of our elderly and does a great job doing it, by the way, and then all of the people who were employed, but people who were working but didn't have the money to afford insurance and didn't have anybody, an employer or anybody else, to help them. That was the slot that the Obamacare approach was to take. And like I say, 20 million people now have health insurance. So if we just rip it up and throw it away, what Donald's not telling you is we just turn it back to the insurance companies the way it used to be, and that means the insurance companies...  ... get to do pretty much whatever they want, including saying, look, I'm sorry, you've got diabetes, you had cancer, your child has asthma...  ... you may not be able to have insurance because you can't afford it. So let's fix what's broken about it, but let's not throw it away and give it all back to the insurance companies and the drug companies. That's not going to work.  Well, thank you for asking your question. And I've heard this question from a lot of Muslim-Americans across our country, because, unfortunately, there's been a lot of very divisive, dark things said about Muslims. And even someone like Captain Khan, the young man who sacrificed himself defending our country in the United States Army, has been subject to attack by Donald. I want to say just a couple of things. First, we've had Muslims in America since George Washington. And we've had many successful Muslims. We just lost a particular well-known one with Muhammad Ali.  My vision of America is an America where everyone has a place, if you're willing to work hard, you do your part, you contribute to the community. That's what America is. That's what we want America to be for our children and our grandchildren. It's also very short-sighted and even dangerous to be engaging in the kind of demagogic rhetoric that Donald has about Muslims. We need American Muslims to be part of our eyes and ears on our front lines. I've worked with a lot of different Muslim groups around America. I've met with a lot of them, and I've heard how important it is for them to feel that they are wanted and included and part of our country, part of our homeland security, and that's what I want to see. It's also important I intend to defeat ISIS, to do so in a coalition with majority Muslim nations. Right now, a lot of those nations are hearing what Donald says and wondering, why should we cooperate with the Americans? And this is a gift to ISIS and the terrorists, violent jihadist terrorists. We are not at war with Islam. And it is a mistake and it plays into the hands of the terrorists to act as though we are. So I want a country where citizens like you and your family are just as welcome as anyone else.  Well, first of all, I will not let anyone into our country that I think poses a risk to us. But there are a lot of refugees, women and children -- think of that picture we all saw of that 4-year-old boy with the blood on his forehead because he'd been bombed by the Russian and Syrian air forces. There are children suffering in this catastrophic war, largely, I believe, because of Russian aggression. And we need to do our part. We by no means are carrying anywhere near the load that Europe and others are. But we will have vetting that is as tough as it needs to be from our professionals, our intelligence experts and others. But it is important for us as a policy, you know, not to say, as Donald has said, we're going to ban people based on a religion. How do you do that? We are a country founded on religious freedom and liberty. How do we do what he has advocated without causing great distress within our own county? Are we going to have religious tests when people fly into our country? And how do we expect to be able to implement those? So I thought that what he said was extremely unwise and even dangerous. And indeed, you can look at the propaganda on a lot of the terrorists sites, and what Donald Trump says about Muslims is used to recruit fighters, because they want to create a war between us. And the final thing I would say, this is the 10th or 12th time that he's denied being for the war in Iraq. We have it on tape. The entire press corps has looked at it. It's been debunked, but it never stops him from saying whatever he wants to say.  So, please...  ... go to HillaryClinton.com and you can see it. Well, right. As I recall, that was something I said about Abraham Lincoln after having seen the wonderful Steven Spielberg movie called "Lincoln." It was a master class watching President Lincoln get the Congress to approve the 13th Amendment. It was principled, and it was strategic. And I was making the point that it is hard sometimes to get the Congress to do what you want to do and you have to keep working at it. And, yes, President Lincoln was trying to convince some people, he used some arguments, convincing other people, he used other arguments. That was a great -- I thought a great display of presidential leadership. But, you know, let's talk about what's really going on here, Martha, because our intelligence community just came out and said in the last few days that the Kremlin, meaning Putin and the Russian government, are directing the attacks, the hacking on American accounts to influence our election. And WikiLeaks is part of that, as are other sites where the Russians hack information, we don't even know if it's accurate information, and then they put it out. We have never in the history of our country been in a situation where an adversary, a foreign power, is working so hard to influence the outcome of the election. And believe me, they're not doing it to get me elected. They're doing it to try to influence the election for Donald Trump.  Now, maybe because he has praised Putin, maybe because he says he agrees with a lot of what Putin wants to do, maybe because he wants to do business in Moscow, I don't know the reasons. But we deserve answers. And we should demand that Donald release all of his tax returns so that people can see what are the entanglements and the financial relationships that he has...  ... with the Russians and other foreign powers. Well, everything you've heard just now from Donald is not true. I'm sorry I have to keep saying this, but he lives in an alternative reality. And it is sort of amusing to hear somebody who hasn't paid federal income taxes in maybe 20 years talking about what he's going to do. But I'll tell you what he's going to do. His plan will give the wealthy and corporations the biggest tax cuts they've ever had, more than the Bush tax cuts by at least a factor of two. Donald always takes care of Donald and people like Donald, and this would be a massive gift. And, indeed, the way that he talks about his tax cuts would end up raising taxes on middle-class families, millions of middle-class families. Now, here's what I want to do. I have said nobody who makes less than $250,000 a year -- and that's the vast majority of Americans as you know -- will have their taxes raised, because I think we've got to go where the money is. And the money is with people who have taken advantage of every single break in the tax code. And, yes, when I was a senator, I did vote to close corporate loopholes. I voted to close, I think, one of the loopholes he took advantage of when he claimed a billion-dollar loss that enabled him to avoid paying taxes. I want to have a tax on people who are making a million dollars. It's called the Buffett rule. Yes, Warren Buffett is the one who's gone out and said somebody like him should not be paying a lower tax rate than his secretary. I want to have a surcharge on incomes above $5 million. We have to make up for lost times, because I want to invest in you. I want to invest in hard-working families. And I think it's been unfortunate, but it's happened, that since the Great Recession, the gains have all gone to the top. And we need to reverse that. People like Donald, who paid zero in taxes, zero for our vets, zero for our military, zero for health and education, that is wrong.  And we're going to make sure that nobody, no corporation, and no individual can get away without paying his fair share to support our country.  Well, here we go again. I've been in favor of getting rid of carried interest for years, starting when I was a senator from New York. But that's not the point here.  Because I was a senator with a Republican president. I will be the president and we will get it done. That's exactly right. You know, under our Constitution, presidents have something called veto power. Look, he has now said repeatedly, "30 years this and 30 years that." So let me talk about my 30 years in public service. I'm very glad to do so. Eight million kids every year have health insurance, because when I was first lady I worked with Democrats and Republicans to create the Children's Health Insurance Program. Hundreds of thousands of kids now have a chance to be adopted because I worked to change our adoption and foster care system. After 9/11, I went to work with Republican mayor, governor and president to rebuild New York and to get health care for our first responders who were suffering because they had run toward danger and gotten sickened by it. Hundreds of thousands of National Guard and Reserve members have health care because of work that I did, and children have safer medicines because I was able to pass a law that required the dosing to be more carefully done. When I was secretary of state, I went around the world advocating for our country, but also advocating for women's rights, to make sure that women had a decent chance to have a better life and negotiated a treaty with Russia to lower nuclear weapons. Four hundred pieces of legislation have my name on it as a sponsor or cosponsor when I was a senator for eight years. I worked very hard and was very proud to be re-elected in New York by an even bigger margin than I had been elected the first time. And as president, I will take that work, that bipartisan work, that finding common ground, because you have to be able to get along with people to get things done in Washington.  I've proven that I can, and for 30 years, I've produced results for people.  Well, the situation in Syria is catastrophic. And every day that goes by, we see the results of the regime by Assad in partnership with the Iranians on the ground, the Russians in the air, bombarding places, in particular Aleppo, where there are hundreds of thousands of people, probably about 250,000 still left. And there is a determined effort by the Russian air force to destroy Aleppo in order to eliminate the last of the Syrian rebels who are really holding out against the Assad regime. Russia hasn't paid any attention to ISIS. They're interested in keeping Assad in power. So I, when I was secretary of state, advocated and I advocate today a no-fly zone and safe zones. We need some leverage with the Russians, because they are not going to come to the negotiating table for a diplomatic resolution, unless there is some leverage over them. And we have to work more closely with our partners and allies on the ground. But I want to emphasize that what is at stake here is the ambitions and the aggressiveness of Russia. Russia has decided that it's all in, in Syria. And they've also decided who they want to see become president of the United States, too, and it's not me. I've stood up to Russia. I've taken on Putin and others, and I would do that as president. I think wherever we can cooperate with Russia, that's fine. And I did as secretary of state. That's how we got a treaty reducing nuclear weapons. It's how we got the sanctions on Iran that put a lid on the Iranian nuclear program without firing a single shot. So I would go to the negotiating table with more leverage than we have now. But I do support the effort to investigate for crimes, war crimes committed by the Syrians and the Russians and try to hold them accountable.  No, I wasn't. I was gone. I hate to interrupt you, but at some point...  At some point, we need to do some fact-checking here.  I would not use American ground forces in Syria. I think that would be a very serious mistake. I don't think American troops should be holding territory, which is what they would have to do as an occupying force. I don't think that is a smart strategy. I do think the use of special forces, which we're using, the use of enablers and trainers in Iraq, which has had some positive effects, are very much in our interests, and so I do support what is happening, but let me just...  Well, Martha, I hope that by the time I -- if I'm fortunate...  I hope by the time I am president that we will have pushed ISIS out of Iraq. I do think that there is a good chance that we can take Mosul. And, you know, Donald says he knows more about ISIS than the generals. No, he doesn't. There are a lot of very important planning going on, and some of it is to signal to the Sunnis in the area, as well as Kurdish Peshmerga fighters, that we all need to be in this. And that takes a lot of planning and preparation. I would go after Baghdadi. I would specifically target Baghdadi, because I think our targeting of Al Qaida leaders -- and I was involved in a lot of those operations, highly classified ones -- made a difference. So I think that could help. I would also consider arming the Kurds. The Kurds have been our best partners in Syria, as well as Iraq. And I know there's a lot of concern about that in some circles, but I think they should have the equipment they need so that Kurdish and Arab fighters on the ground are the principal way that we take Raqqa after pushing ISIS out of Iraq.  Well, 67 percent of the people voted to re-elect me when I ran for my second term, and I was very proud and very humbled by that. Mr. Carter, I have tried my entire life to do what I can to support children and families. You know, right out of law school, I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund. And Donald talks a lot about, you know, the 30 years I've been in public service. I'm proud of that. You know, I started off as a young lawyer working against discrimination against African-American children in schools and in the criminal justice system. I worked to make sure that kids with disabilities could get a public education, something that I care very much about. I have worked with Latinos -- one of my first jobs in politics was down in south Texas registering Latino citizens to be able to vote. So I have a deep devotion, to use your absolutely correct word, to making sure that an every American feels like he or she has a place in our country. And I think when you look at the letters that I get, a lot of people are worried that maybe they wouldn't have a place in Donald Trump's America. They write me, and one woman wrote me about her son, Felix. She adopted him from Ethiopia when he was a toddler. He's 10 years old now. This is the only one country he's ever known. And he listens to Donald on TV and he said to his mother one day, will he send me back to Ethiopia if he gets elected? You know, children listen to what is being said. To go back to the very, very first question. And there's a lot of fear -- in fact, teachers and parents are calling it the Trump effect. Bullying is up. A lot of people are feeling, you know, uneasy. A lot of kids are expressing their concerns. So, first and foremost, I will do everything I can to reach out to everybody.  Democrats, Republicans, independents, people across our country. If you don't vote for me, I still want to be your president.  I want to be the best president I can be for every American. Well, within hours I said that I was sorry about the way I talked about that, because my argument is not with his supporters. It's with him and with the hateful and divisive campaign that he has run, and the inciting of violence at his rallies, and the very brutal kinds of comments about not just women, but all Americans, all kinds of Americans. And what he has said about African-Americans and Latinos, about Muslims, about POWs, about immigrants, about people with disabilities, he's never apologized for. And so I do think that a lot of the tone and tenor that he has said -- I'm proud of the campaign that Bernie Sanders and I ran. We ran a campaign based on issues, not insults. And he is supporting me 100 percent.  Because we talked about what we wanted to do. We might have had some differences, and we had a lot of debates...  No. Well, it's not only my opinion. It's the opinion of many others, national security experts, Republicans, former Republican members of Congress. But it's in part because those of us who have had the great privilege of seeing this job up close and know how difficult it is, and it's not just because I watched my husband take a $300 billion deficit and turn it into a $200 billion surplus, and 23 million new jobs were created, and incomes went up for everybody. Everybody. African-American incomes went up 33 percent. And it's not just because I worked with George W. Bush after 9/11, and I was very proud that when I told him what the city needed, what we needed to recover, he said you've got it, and he never wavered. He stuck with me. And I have worked and I admire President Obama. He inherited the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. That was a terrible time for our country.  Nine million people lost their jobs. Five million homes were lost. And $13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out. We are back on the right track. He would send us back into recession with his tax plans that benefit the wealthiest of Americans. Thank you. Well, you're right. This is one of the most important issues in this election. I want to appoint Supreme Court justices who understand the way the world really works, who have real-life experience, who have not just been in a big law firm and maybe clerked for a judge and then gotten on the bench, but, you know, maybe they tried some more cases, they actually understand what people are up against. Because I think the current court has gone in the wrong direction. And so I would want to see the Supreme Court reverse Citizens United and get dark, unaccountable money out of our politics. Donald doesn't agree with that. I would like the Supreme Court to understand that voting rights are still a big problem in many parts of our country, that we don't always do everything we can to make it possible for people of color and older people and young people to be able to exercise their franchise. I want a Supreme Court that will stick with Roe v. Wade and a woman's right to choose, and I want a Supreme Court that will stick with marriage equality. Now, Donald has put forth the names of some people that he would consider. And among the ones that he has suggested are people who would reverse Roe v. Wade and reverse marriage equality. I think that would be a terrible mistake and would take us backwards. I want a Supreme Court that doesn't always side with corporate interests. I want a Supreme Court that understands because you're wealthy and you can give more money to something doesn't mean you have any more rights or should have any more rights than anybody else. So I have very clear views about what I want to see to kind of change the balance on the Supreme Court. And I regret deeply that the Senate has not done its job and they have not permitted a vote on the person that President Obama, a highly qualified person, they've not given him a vote to be able to be have the full complement of nine Supreme Court justices. I think that was a dereliction of duty. I hope that they will see their way to doing it, but if I am so fortunate enough as to be president, I will immediately move to make sure that we fill that, we have nine justices that get to work on behalf of our people.  Well... The question was about the Supreme Court. And I just want to quickly say, I respect the Second Amendment. But I believe there should be comprehensive background checks, and we should close the gun show loophole, and close the online loophole.  We have to save as many lives as we possibly can. And actually -- well, that was very interesting. First of all, China is illegally dumping steel in the United States and Donald Trump is buying it to build his buildings, putting steelworkers and American steel plants out of business. That's something that I fought against as a senator and that I would have a trade prosecutor to make sure that we don't get taken advantage of by China on steel or anything else. You know, because it sounds like you're in the business or you're aware of people in the business -- you know that we are now for the first time ever energy-independent. We are not dependent upon the Middle East. But the Middle East still controls a lot of the prices. So the price of oil has been way down. And that has had a damaging effect on a lot of the oil companies, right? We are, however, producing a lot of natural gas, which serves as a bridge to more renewable fuels. And I think that's an important transition. We've got to remain energy-independent. It gives us much more power and freedom than to be worried about what goes on in the Middle East. We have enough worries over there without having to worry about that. So I have a comprehensive energy policy, but it really does include fighting climate change, because I think that is a serious problem. And I support moving toward more clean, renewable energy as quickly as we can, because I think we can be the 21st century clean energy superpower and create millions of new jobs and businesses. But I also want to be sure that we don't leave people behind. That's why I'm the only candidate from the very beginning of this campaign who had a plan to help us revitalize coal country, because those coal miners and their fathers and their grandfathers, they dug that coal out. A lot of them lost their lives. They were injured, but they turned the lights on and they powered their factories. I don't want to walk away from them. So we've got to do something for them.  But the price of coal is down worldwide. So we have to look at this comprehensively. And that's exactly what I have proposed. I hope you will go to HillaryClinton.com and look at my entire policy. Well, I certainly will, because I think that's a very fair and important question. Look, I respect his children. His children are incredibly able and devoted, and I think that says a lot about Donald. I don't agree with nearly anything else he says or does, but I do respect that. And I think that is something that as a mother and a grandmother is very important to me. So I believe that this election has become in part so -- so conflict-oriented, so intense because there's a lot at stake. This is not an ordinary time, and this is not an ordinary election. We are going to be choosing a president who will set policy for not just four or eight years, but because of some of the important decisions we have to make here at home and around the world, from the Supreme Court to energy and so much else, and so there is a lot at stake. It's one of the most consequential elections that we've had. And that's why I've tried to put forth specific policies and plans, trying to get it off of the personal and put it on to what it is I want to do as president. And that's why I hope people will check on that for themselves so that they can see that, yes, I've spent 30 years, actually maybe a little more, working to help kids and families. And I want to take all that experience to the White House and do that every single day.  Thank you very much, Chris. And thanks to UNLV for hosting us. You know, I think when we talk about the Supreme Court, it really raises the central issue in this election, namely, what kind of country are we going to be? What kind of opportunities will we provide for our citizens? What kind of rights will Americans have? And I feel strongly that the Supreme Court needs to stand on the side of the American people, not on the side of the powerful corporations and the wealthy. For me, that means that we need a Supreme Court that will stand up on behalf of women's rights, on behalf of the rights of the LGBT community, that will stand up and say no to Citizens United, a decision that has undermined the election system in our country because of the way it permits dark, unaccountable money to come into our electoral system. I have major disagreements with my opponent about these issues and others that will be before the Supreme Court. But I feel that at this point in our country's history, it is important that we not reverse marriage equality, that we not reverse Roe v. Wade, that we stand up against Citizens United, we stand up for the rights of people in the workplace, that we stand up and basically say: The Supreme Court should represent all of us. That's how I see the court, and the kind of people that I would be looking to nominate to the court would be in the great tradition of standing up to the powerful, standing up on behalf of our rights as Americans. And I look forward to having that opportunity. I would hope that the Senate would do its job and confirm the nominee that President Obama has sent to them. That's the way the Constitution fundamentally should operate. The president nominates, and then the Senate advises and consents, or not, but they go forward with the process.  Well, first of all, I support the Second Amendment. I lived in Arkansas for 18 wonderful years. I represented upstate New York. I understand and respect the tradition of gun ownership. It goes back to the founding of our country. But I also believe that there can be and must be reasonable regulation. Because I support the Second Amendment doesn't mean that I want people who shouldn't have guns to be able to threaten you, kill you or members of your family. And so when I think about what we need to do, we have 33,000 people a year who die from guns. I think we need comprehensive background checks, need to close the online loophole, close the gun show loophole. There's other matters that I think are sensible that are the kind of reforms that would make a difference that are not in any way conflicting with the Second Amendment. You mentioned the Heller decision. And what I was saying that you referenced, Chris, was that I disagreed with the way the court applied the Second Amendment in that case, because what the District of Columbia was trying to do was to protect toddlers from guns and so they wanted people with guns to safely store them. And the court didn't accept that reasonable regulation, but they've accepted many others. So I see no conflict between saving people's lives and defending the Second Amendment.  Well, I was upset because, unfortunately, dozens of toddlers injure themselves, even kill people with guns, because, unfortunately, not everyone who has loaded guns in their homes takes appropriate precautions. But there's no doubt that I respect the Second Amendment, that I also believe there's an individual right to bear arms. That is not in conflict with sensible, commonsense regulation. And, you know, look, I understand that Donald's been strongly supported by the NRA. The gun lobby's on his side. They're running millions of dollars of ads against me. And I regret that, because what I would like to see is for people to come together and say: Of course we're going to protect and defend the Second Amendment. But we're going to do it in a way that tries to save some of these 33,000 lives that we lose every year.  Well, I strongly support Roe v. Wade, which guarantees a constitutional right to a woman to make the most intimate, most difficult, in many cases, decisions about her health care that one can imagine. And in this case, it's not only about Roe v. Wade. It is about what's happening right now in America. So many states are putting very stringent regulations on women that block them from exercising that choice to the extent that they are defunding Planned Parenthood, which, of course, provides all kinds of cancer screenings and other benefits for women in our country. Donald has said he's in favor of defunding Planned Parenthood. He even supported shutting the government down to defund Planned Parenthood. I will defend Planned Parenthood. I will defend Roe v. Wade, and I will defend women's rights to make their own health care decisions.  And we have come too far to have that turned back now. And, indeed, he said women should be punished, that there should be some form of punishment for women who obtain abortions. And I could just not be more opposed to that kind of thinking.  Because Roe v. Wade very clearly sets out that there can be regulations on abortion so long as the life and the health of the mother are taken into account. And when I voted as a senator, I did not think that that was the case. The kinds of cases that fall at the end of pregnancy are often the most heartbreaking, painful decisions for families to make. I have met with women who toward the end of their pregnancy get the worst news one could get, that their health is in jeopardy if they continue to carry to term or that something terrible has happened or just been discovered about the pregnancy. I do not think the United States government should be stepping in and making those most personal of decisions. So you can regulate if you are doing so with the life and the health of the mother taken into account.  Well, that is not what happens in these cases. And using that kind of scare rhetoric is just terribly unfortunate. You should meet with some of the women that I have met with, women I have known over the course of my life. This is one of the worst possible choices that any woman and her family has to make. And I do not believe the government should be making it. You know, I've had the great honor of traveling across the world on behalf of our country. I've been to countries where governments either forced women to have abortions, like they used to do in China, or forced women to bear children, like they used to do in Romania. And I can tell you: The government has no business in the decisions that women make with their families in accordance with their faith, with medical advice. And I will stand up for that right.  Well, as he was talking, I was thinking about a young girl I met here in Las Vegas, Carla, who is very worried that her parents might be deported, because she was born in this country but they were not. They work hard, they do everything they can to give her a good life. And you're right. I don't want to rip families apart. I don't want to be sending parents away from children. I don't want to see the deportation force that Donald has talked about in action in our country. We have 11 million undocumented people. They have 4 million American citizen children, 15 million people. He said as recently as a few weeks ago in Phoenix that every undocumented person would be subject to deportation. Now, here's what that means. It means you would have to have a massive law enforcement presence, where law enforcement officers would be going school to school, home to home, business to business, rounding up people who are undocumented. And we would then have to put them on trains, on buses to get them out of our country. I think that is an idea that is not in keeping with who we are as a nation. I think it's an idea that would rip our country apart. I have been for border security for years. I voted for border security in the United States Senate. And my comprehensive immigration reform plan of course includes border security. But I want to put our resources where I think they're most needed: Getting rid of any violent person. Anybody who should be deported, we should deport them. When it comes to the wall that Donald talks about building, he went to Mexico, he had a meeting with the Mexican president. Didn't even raise it. He choked and then got into a Twitter war because the Mexican president said we're not paying for that wall. So I think we are both a nation of immigrants and we are a nation of laws and that we can act accordingly. And that's why I'm introducing comprehensive immigration reform within the first 100 days with the path to citizenship.  I voted for border security, and there are...  There are some limited places where that was appropriate. There also is necessarily going to be new technology and how best to deploy that. But it is clear, when you look at what Donald has been proposing, he started his campaign bashing immigrants, calling Mexican immigrants rapists and criminals and drug dealers, that he has a very different view about what we should do to deal with immigrants. Now, what I am also arguing is that bringing undocumented immigrants out from the shadows, putting them into the formal economy will be good, because then employers can't exploit them and undercut Americans' wages. And Donald knows a lot about this. He used undocumented labor to build the Trump Tower. He underpaid undocumented workers, and when they complained, he basically said what a lot of employers do: "You complain, I'll get you deported." I want to get everybody out of the shadows, get the economy working, and not let employers like Donald exploit undocumented workers, which hurts them, but also hurts American workers.  We will not have open borders. That is... That is a rank mischaracterization. We will have secure borders, but we'll also have reform. And this used to be a bipartisan issue. Ronald Reagan was the last president...  ... to sign immigration reform, and George W. Bush supported it, as well.  Well, if you went on to read the rest of the sentence, I was talking about energy. You know, we trade more energy with our neighbors than we trade with the rest of the world combined. And I do want us to have an electric grid, an energy system that crosses borders. I think that would be a great benefit to us. But you are very clearly quoting from WikiLeaks. And what's really important about WikiLeaks is that the Russian government has engaged in espionage against Americans. They have hacked American websites, American accounts of private people, of institutions. Then they have given that information to WikiLeaks for the purpose of putting it on the Internet. This has come from the highest levels of the Russian government, clearly, from Putin himself, in an effort, as 17 of our intelligence agencies have confirmed, to influence our election.  So I actually think the most important question of this evening, Chris, is, finally, will Donald Trump admit and condemn that the Russians are doing this and make it clear that he will not have the help of Putin in in this election, that he rejects Russian espionage against Americans, which he actually encouraged in the past? Those are the questions we need answered. We've never had anything like this happen in any of our elections before.  Well, that's because he'd rather have a puppet as president of the United States.  And it's pretty clear... It's pretty clear you won't admit... ... that the Russians have engaged in cyberattacks against the United States of America, that you encouraged espionage against our people, that you are willing to spout the Putin line, sign up for his wish list, break up NATO, do whatever he wants to do, and that you continue to get help from him, because he has a very clear favorite in this race. So I think that this is such an unprecedented situation. We've never had a foreign government trying to interfere in our election. We have 17 -- 17 intelligence agencies, civilian and military, who have all concluded that these espionage attacks, these cyberattacks, come from the highest levels of the Kremlin and they are designed to influence our election. I find that deeply disturbing.  And I think it's time you take a stand... I am not quoting myself. I am quoting 17... ... 17 intelligence -- do you doubt 17 military and civilian... ... agencies. Well, he'd rather believe Vladimir Putin than the military and civilian intelligence professionals who are sworn to protect us. I find that just absolutelyÉ I -- I find it ironic that he's raising nuclear weapons. This is a person who has been very cavalier, even casual about the use of nuclear weapons. He's...  ... advocated more countries getting them, Japan, Korea, even Saudi Arabia. He said, well, if we have them, why don't we use them, which I think is terrifying. But here's the deal. The bottom line on nuclear weapons is that when the president gives the order, it must be followed. There's about four minutes between the order being given and the people responsible for launching nuclear weapons to do so. And that's why 10 people who have had that awesome responsibility have come out and, in an unprecedented way, said they would not trust Donald Trump with the nuclear codes or to have his finger on the nuclear button.  Well, I'm just quoting you when you were asked...  ... about a potential nuclear -- nuclear competition in Asia, you said, you know, go ahead, enjoy yourselves, folks. That kind...  ... of language -- well... The United States has kept the peace -- the United States has kept the peace through our alliances. Donald wants to tear up our alliances. I think it makes the world safer and, frankly, it makes the United States safer. I would work with our allies in Asia, in Europe, in the Middle East, and elsewhere. That's the only way we're going to be able to keep the peace.  Well, I think when the middle class thrives, America thrives. And so my plan is based on growing the economy, giving middle-class families many more opportunities. I want us to have the biggest jobs program since World War II, jobs in infrastructure and advanced manufacturing. I think we can compete with high-wage countries, and I believe we should. New jobs and clean energy, not only to fight climate change, which is a serious problem, but to create new opportunities and new businesses. I want us to do more to help small business. That's where two- thirds of the new jobs are going to come from. I want us to raise the national minimum wage, because people who live in poverty should not -- who work full-time should not still be in poverty. And I sure do want to make sure women get equal pay for the work we do. I feel strongly that we have to have an education system that starts with preschool and goes through college. That's why I want more technical education in high schools and in community colleges, real apprenticeships to prepare young people for the jobs of the future. I want to make college debt-free and for families making less than $125,000, you will not get a tuition bill from a public college or university if the plan that I worked on with Bernie Sanders is enacted. And we're going to work hard to make sure that it is, because we are going to go where the money is. Most of the gains in the last years since the Great Recession have gone to the very top. So we are going to have the wealthy pay their fair share. We're going to have corporations make a contribution greater than they are now to our country. That is a plan that has been analyzed by independent experts which said that it could produce 10 million new jobs. By contrast, Donald's plan has been analyzed to conclude it might lose 3.5 million jobs. Why? Because his whole plan is to cut taxes, to give the biggest tax breaks ever to the wealthy and to corporations, adding $20 trillion to our debt, and causing the kind of dislocation that we have seen before, because it truly will be trickle-down economics on steroids. So the plan I have I think will actually produce greater opportunities. The plan he has will cost us jobs and possibly lead to another Great Recession.  Well, let me translate that, if I can, Chris, because...  ... the fact is, he's going to advocate for the largest tax cuts we've ever seen, three times more than the tax cuts under the Bush administration. I have said repeatedly throughout this campaign: I will not raise taxes on anyone making $250,000 or less. I also will not add a penny to the debt. I have costed out what I'm going to do. He will, through his massive tax cuts, add $20 trillion to the debt. Well, he mentioned the debt. We know how to get control of the debt. When my husband was president, we went from a $300 billion deficit to a $200 billion surplus and we were actually on the path to eliminating the national debt. When President Obama came into office, he inherited the worst economic disaster since the Great Depression. He has cut the deficit by two-thirds. So, yes, one of the ways you go after the debt, one of the ways you create jobs is by investing in people. So I do have investments, investments in new jobs, investments in education, skill training, and the opportunities for people to get ahead and stay ahead. That's the kind of approach that will work.  Cutting taxes on the wealthy, we've tried that. It has not worked the way that it has been promised.  Well, it's a combination, Chris. And let me say that when you inherit the level of economic catastrophe that President Obama inherited, it was a real touch-and-go situation. I was in the Senate before I became secretary of state. I've never seen people as physically distraught as the Bush administration team was because of what was happening to the economy. I personally believe that the steps that President Obama took saved the economy. He doesn't get the credit he deserves for taking some very hard positions. But it was a terrible recession. So now we've dug ourselves out of it, we're standing, but we're not yet running. So what I am proposing is that we invest from the middle out and the ground up, not the top down. That is not going to work. That's why what I have put forward doesn't add a penny to the debt, but it is the kind of approach that will enable more people to take those new jobs, higher-paying jobs. We're beginning to see some increase in incomes, and we certainly have had a long string of increasing jobs. We've got to do more to get the whole economy moving, and that's what I believe I will be able to do.  Well, first, let me say, number one, when I saw the final agreement for TPP, I said I was against it. It didn't meet my test. I've had the same test. Does it create jobs, raise incomes, and further our national security? I'm against it now. I'll be against it after the election. I'll be against it when I'm president. There's only one of us on this stage who's actually shipped jobs to Mexico, because that's Donald. He's shipped jobs to 12 countries, including Mexico. But he mentioned China. And, you know, one of the biggest problems we have with China is the illegal dumping of steel and aluminum into our markets. I have fought against that as a senator. I've stood up against it as secretary of state. Donald has bought Chinese steel and aluminum. In fact, the Trump Hotel right here in Las Vegas was made with Chinese steel. So he goes around with crocodile tears about how terrible it is, but he has given jobs to Chinese steelworkers, not American steelworkers.  That's the kind of approach that is just not going to work. We're going to pull the country together. We're going to have trade agreements that we enforce. That's why I'm going to have a trade prosecutor for the first time in history. And we're going to enforce those agreements, and we're going to look for businesses to help us by buying American products.  No, I voted.  Well, first of all, what he just said about the State Department is not only untrue, it's been debunked numerous times.  But I think it's really an important issue. He raised the 30 years of experience, so let me just talk briefly about that. You know, back in the 1970s, I worked for the Children's Defense Fund. And I was taking on discrimination against African-American kids in schools. He was getting sued by the Justice Department for racial discrimination in his apartment buildings. In the 1980s, I was working to reform the schools in Arkansas. He was borrowing $14 million from his father to start his businesses. In the 1990s, I went to Beijing and I said women's rights are human rights. He insulted a former Miss Universe, Alicia Machado, called her an eating machine.  And on the day when I was in the Situation Room, monitoring the raid that brought Osama bin Laden to justice, he was hosting the "Celebrity Apprentice." So I'm happy to compare my 30 years of experience, what I've done for this country, trying to help in every way I could, especially kids and families get ahead and stay ahead, with your 30 years, and I'll let the American people make that decision.  Well... At the last debate, we heard Donald talking about what he did to women. And after that, a number of women have come forward saying that's exactly what he did to them. Now, what was his response? Well, he held a number of big rallies where he said that he could not possibly have done those things to those women because they were not attractive enough for them to be assaulted.  In fact, he went on to say...  He went on to say, "Look at her. I don't think so." About another woman, he said, "That wouldn't be my first choice." He attacked the woman reporter writing the story, called her "disgusting," as he has called a number of women during this campaign. Donald thinks belittling women makes him bigger. He goes after their dignity, their self-worth, and I don't think there is a woman anywhere who doesn't know what that feels like. So we now know what Donald thinks and what he says and how he acts toward women. That's who Donald is. I think it's really up to all of us to demonstrate who we are and who our country is, and to stand up and be very clear about what we expect from our next president, how we want to bring our country together, where we don't want to have the kind of pitting of people one against the other, where instead we celebrate our diversity, we lift people up, and we make our country even greater. America is great, because America is good. And it really is up to all of us to make that true, now and in the future, and particularly for our children and our grandchildren.  Well, every time Donald is pushed on something which is obviously uncomfortable, like what these women are saying, he immediately goes to denying responsibility. And it's not just about women. He never apologizes or says he's sorry for anything. So we know what he has said and what he's done to women. But he also went after a disabled reporter, mocked and mimicked him on national television.  He went after Mr. and Mrs. Khan, the parents of a young man who died serving our country, a Gold Star family, because of their religion. He went after John McCain, a prisoner of war, said he prefers "people who aren't captured." He went after a federal judge, born in Indiana, but who Donald said couldn't be trusted to try the fraud and racketeering case against Trump University because his parents were Mexican. So it's not one thing. This is a pattern, a pattern of divisiveness, of a very dark and in many ways dangerous vision of our country, where he incites violence, where he applauds people who are pushing and pulling and punching at his rallies. That is not who America is. And I hope that as we move in the last weeks of this campaign, more and more people will understand what's at stake in this election. It really does come down to what kind of country we are going to have.  Well, everything I did as secretary of state was in furtherance of our country's interests and our values. The State Department has said that. I think that's been proven. But I am happy, in fact I'm thrilled to talk about the Clinton Foundation, because it is a world-renowned charity and I am so proud of the work that it does. You know, I could talk for the rest of the debate -- I know I don't have the time to do that. But just briefly, the Clinton Foundation made it possible for 11 million people around the world with HIV-AIDS to afford treatment, and that's about half all the people in the world who are getting treatment. In partnership with the American Health Association...  ... we have made environments in schools healthier for kids, including healthier lunches...  Well, it is an open discussion. And you...  Well, but there is no -- but there is no evidence -- but there isÉ There is a lot of evidence about the very good work... ... and the high rankingsÉ Well, very quickly, we at the Clinton Foundation spend 90 percent -- 90 percent of all the money that is donated on behalf of programs of people around the world and in our own country. I'm very proud of that. We have the highest rating from the watchdogs that follow foundations. And I'd be happy to compare what we do with the Trump Foundation, which took money from other people and bought a six- foot portrait of Donald. I mean, who does that? It just was astonishing. But when it comes to Haiti, Haiti is the poorest country in our hemisphere. The earthquake and the hurricanes, it has devastated Haiti. Bill and I have been involved in trying to help Haiti for many years. The Clinton Foundation raised $30 million to help Haiti after the catastrophic earthquake and all of the terrible problems the people there had. We have done things to help small businesses, agriculture, and so much else. And we're going to keep working to help Haiti...  ... because it's an important part of the American experience. But, of course, there's no way we can know whether any of that is true, because he hasn't released his tax returns. He is the first candidate ever to run for president in the last 40-plus years who has not released his tax returns, so everything he says about charity or anything else, we can't prove it. You can look at our tax returns. We've got them all out there. But what is really troubling is that we learned in the last debate he has not paid a penny in federal income tax. And we were talking about immigrants a few minutes ago, Chris. You know, half of all immigrants -- undocumented immigrants in our country -- actually pay federal income tax. So we have undocumented immigrants in America who are paying more federal income tax than a billionaire. I find that just astonishing.  Well, you know...  Made with Chinese steel. Well, Chris, let me respond to that, because that's horrifying. You know, every time Donald thinks things are not going in his direction, he claims whatever it is, is rigged against him. The FBI conducted a year-long investigation into my e-mails. They concluded there was no case; he said the FBI was rigged. He lost the Iowa caucus. He lost the Wisconsin primary. He said the Republican primary was rigged against him. Then Trump University gets sued for fraud and racketeering; he claims the court system and the federal judge is rigged against him. There was even a time when he didn't get an Emmy for his TV program three years in a row and he started tweeting that the Emmys were rigged against him.  This is -- this is a mindset. This is how Donald thinks. And it's funny, but it's also really troubling.  So that is not the way our democracy works. We've been around for 240 years. We've had free and fair elections. We've accepted the outcomes when we may not have liked them. And that is what must be expected of anyone standing on a debate stage during a general election. You know, President Obama said the other day when you're whining before the game is even finished... ... it just shows you're not up to doing the job. And let's -- you know, let's be clear about what he is saying and what that means. He is denigrating -- he's talking down our democracy. And I, for one, am appalled that somebody who is the nominee of one of our two major parties would take that kind of position.  Well, I am encouraged that there is an effort led by the Iraqi army, supported by Kurdish forces, and also given the help and advice from the number of special forces and other Americans on the ground. But I will not support putting American soldiers into Iraq as an occupying force. I don't think that is in our interest, and I don't think that would be smart to do. In fact, Chris, I think that would be a big red flag waving for ISIS to reconstitute itself. The goal here is to take back Mosul. It's going to be a hard fight. I've got no illusions about that. And then continue to press into Syria to begin to take back and move on Raqqa, which is the ISIS headquarters. I am hopeful that the hard work that American military advisers have done will pay off and that we will see a real -- a really successful military operation. But we know we've got lots of work to do. Syria will remain a hotbed of terrorism as long as the civil war, aided and abetted by the Iranians and the Russians, continue. So I have said, look, we need to keep our eye on ISIS. That's why I want to have an intelligence surge that protects us here at home, why we have to go after them from the air, on the ground, online, why we have to make sure here at home we don't let terrorists buy weapons. If you're too dangerous to fly, you're too dangerous to buy a gun. And I'm going to continue to push for a no-fly zone and safe havens within Syria not only to help protect the Syrians and prevent the constant outflow of refugees, but to, frankly, gain some leverage on both the Syrian government and the Russians so that perhaps we can have the kind of serious negotiation necessary to bring the conflict to an end and go forward on a political track.  Well, you know, once again, Donald is implying that he didn't support the invasion of Iraq. I said it was a mistake. I've said that years ago. He has consistently denied what is...  ... a very clear fact that... ... before the invasion, he supported it. And, you know, I just want everybody to go Google it. Google "Donald Trump Iraq." And you will see the dozens of sources which verify that he was for the invasion of Iraq.  And you can actually hear the audio of him saying that. Now, why does that matter? Well, it matters because he has not told the truth about that position. I guess he believes it makes him look better now to contrast with me because I did vote for it. But what's really important here is to understand all the interplay. Mosul is a Sunni city. Mosul is on the border of Syria. And, yes, we do need to go after Baghdadi, and -- just like we went after bin Laden, while you were doing "Celebrity Apprentice," and we brought him to justice. We need to go after the leadership. But we need to get rid of them, get rid of their fighters. There are an estimated several thousand fighters in Mosul. They've been digging underground. They've been prepared to defend. It's going to be tough fighting. But I think we can take back Mosul, and then we can move on into Syria and take back Raqqa. This is what we have to do. I'm just amazed that he seems to think that the Iraqi government and our allies and everybody else launched the attack on Mosul to help me in this election, but that's how Donald thinks. You know, he always is looking for some conspiracy.  He has all the conspiracy theoriesÉ This conspiracy theory, which he's been spewing out for quite some time.  He saysÉ ... unfit, and he proves it every time he talks.  Well, you should ask Bernie Sanders who he's supporting for president. And he has said...  ... as he has campaigned for me around the country, you are the most dangerous person to run for president in the modern history of America. I think he's right.  Well, Chris, first of all, I think a no-fly zone could save lives and could hasten the end of the conflict. I'm well aware of the really legitimate concerns that you have expressed from both the president and the general. This would not be done just on the first day. This would take a lot of negotiation. And it would also take making it clear to the Russians and the Syrians that our purpose here was to provide safe zones on the ground. We've had millions of people leave Syria and those millions of people inside Syria who have been dislocated. So I think we could strike a deal and make it very clear to the Russians and the Syrians that this was something that we believe was in the best interests of the people on the ground in Syria, it would help us with our fight against ISIS. But I want to respond to what Donald said about refugees. He's made these claims repeatedly. I am not going to let anyone into this country who is not vetted, who we do not have confidence in. But I am not going to slam the door on women and children. That picture of that little 4-year-old boy in Aleppo, with the blood coming down his face while he sat in an ambulance, is haunting. And so we are going to do very careful, thorough vetting. That does not solve our internal challenges with ISIS and our need to stop radicalization, to work with American Muslim communities who are on the front lines to identify and prevent attacks. In fact, the killer of the dozens of people at the nightclub in Orlando, the Pulse nightclub, was born in Queens, the same place Donald was born. So let's be clear about what the threat is and how we are best going to be able to meet it. And, yes, some of that threat emanates from over in Syria and Iraq, and we've got to keep fighting, and I will defeat ISIS, and some of it is we have to up our game and be much smarter here at home.  Well, first, when I hear Donald talk like that and know that his slogan is "Make America Great Again," I wonder when he thought America was great. And before he rushes and says, "You know, before you and President Obama were there," I think it's important to recognize that he has been criticizing our government for decades. You know, back in 1987, he took out a $100,000 ad in the New York Times, during the time when President Reagan was president, and basically said exactly what he just said now, that we were the laughingstock of the world. He was criticizing President Reagan. This is the way Donald thinks about himself, puts himself into, you know, the middle and says, "You know, I alone can fix it," as he said on the convention stage. But if you look at the debt, which is the issue you asked about, Chris, I pay for everything I'm proposing. I do not add a penny to the national debt. I take that very seriously, because I do think it's one of the issues we've got to come to grips with. So when I talk about how we're going to pay for education, how we're going to invest in infrastructure, how we're going to get the cost of prescription drugs down, and a lot of the other issues that people talk to me about all the time, I've made it very clear we are going where the money is. We are going to ask the wealthy and corporations to pay their fair share. And there is no evidence whatsoever that that will slow down or diminish our growth. In fact, I think just the opposite. We'll have what economists call middle-out growth. We've got to get back to rebuilding the middle class, the families of America. That's where growth will come from. That's why I want to invest in you. I want to invest in your family. And I think that's the smartest way to grow the economy, to make the economy fairer. And we just have a big disagreement about this. It may be because of our experiences. You know, he started off with his dad as a millionaire...  I started off with -- my dad was a small-business man. And I think it -- you know, it's a difference that affects how we see the world and what we want to do with the economy.  Well, Chris, I am on record as saying that we need to put more money into the Social Security Trust Fund. That's part of my commitment to raise taxes on the wealthy. My Social Security payroll contribution will go up, as will Donald's, assuming he can't figure out how to get out of it. But what we want to do is to replenish the Social Security Trust Fund...  ... by making sure that we have sufficient resources, and that will come from either raising the cap and/or finding other ways to get more money into it. I will not cut benefits. I want to enhance benefits for low-income workers and for women who have been disadvantaged by the current Social Security system. But what Donald is proposing with these massive tax cuts will result in a $20 trillion additional national debt. That will have dire consequences for Social Security and Medicare. And I'll say something about the Affordable Care Act, which he wants to repeal. The Affordable Care Act extended the solvency of the Medicare Trust Fund. So if repeals it, our Medicare problem gets worse. What we need to do is go after...  ... the long-term health care drivers. We've got to get costs down, increase value, emphasize wellness. I have a plan for doing that. And I think that we will be able to get entitlement spending under control by with more resources and harder decisions.  Well, I would like to say to everyone watching tonight that I'm reaching out to all Americans -- Democrats, Republicans, and independents -- because we need everybody to help make our country what it should be, to grow the economy, to make it fairer, to make it work for everyone. We need your talents, your skills, your commitments, your energy, your ambition. You know, I've been privileged to see the presidency up close. And I know the awesome responsibility of protecting our country and the incredible opportunity of working to try to make life better for all of you. I have made the cause of children and families really my life's work. That's what my mission will be in the presidency. I will stand up for families against powerful interests, against corporations. I will do everything that I can to make sure that you have good jobs, with rising incomes, that your kids have good educations from preschool through college. I hope you will give me a chance to serve as your president.  I want to recognize the Institute for all you do to inspire the next generation of Latino leaders. Last year, I had the chance to spend time with some of the CHCI interns and fellows. It really was like seeing the future of America in one room. I can't wait to see everything that they achieve. And I can't wait, if I'm fortunate enough to be president, to put some of them to work!  And I want to thank all my friends in the Congressional Hispanic Caucus. You fight every single day to lift up the Latino community ... when the cameras are rolling and when the cameras are off, at home in your districts and here in Washington. And no one understands better than you the pivotal moment we're at right now ... not just for Latinos but for our country. My friends in the caucus have traveled to every battleground state, registered voters. You've stayed focused no matter what kind of outlandish and offensive comments we have heard from my opponent and his supporters. By the way, I personally think a taco truck on every corner sounds absolutely delicious. Now, here's a confession: Running for president is never easy, but it shouldn't be, right? But tonight I have the ultimate challenge: speaking after President Obama. He's always a tough act to follow, in more ways than one. I, for one, don't think the President gets the credit he deserves for rescuing our economy from another Great Depression. Think of what we've achieved these last eight years. American businesses have created 15 million new jobs since the recession. Twenty million Americans have health coverage ... and no one has seen a bigger drop in uninsured rates under the Affordable Care Act than Latino Americans. We got more good news this week. A report came out showing that poverty is going down, and incomes for American families are going up, and Latino families have seen the biggest increase of all. Now, that doesn't mean we rest on our laurels by any stretch. Our work is far from finished. But I am more confident than ever that our best days are still ahead of us. I believe with all my heart that the American Dream is alive and it's big enough for everyone to share its promise. That doesn't mean that lots of people are still not hurting, because I know they are. And when you hear a presidential candidate spewing bigotry and hate, it's easy to get discouraged. But we're here because we know this election is a choice between not just two people but two very different visions for our America's future. Either we're going to make our economy work for everyone, or just those at the top. Either we're going to fear our differences, or embrace and celebrate our diversity. Either we're going to pit Americans against each other and deepen the divides, or we're going to be stronger together. Today, as you know, we're in the midst of Hispanic Heritage Month. In classrooms across America, children will study Dolores Huerta and Cesar Chavez, Juli..n and Joaqu..n Castro, Justice Sotomayor, Roberto Clemente and Laurie Hernandez, Gloria Estefan and Lin-Manuel Miranda, and countless others ... names we know and names we might not know, but every one of whom has enriched this country for generations. Whether you're Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Latin American, Afro-Latino, whether your family just arrived or has been here since before the United States even existed [cheers], you're not strangers. You're not intruders. You're our neighbors, our col-leagues, our friends, our families. You make our nation stronger, smarter, more creative. And I want you to know that I see you and I am with you, and time and again ... time and again we have seen that when we invest in the community, when we make it possible for Latinos to get the health care you need, get the education you desire, compete for jobs, start new businesses, pursue your dreams, all of America benefits. As I said this afternoon in North Carolina, we are in the final stretch of this election. And I intend to close my campaign the way I began my career, fighting for kids and families. That's been the cause of my life. It will be the passion of my presidency. So tonight I want to mention two things I'll do in the first 100 days of my administration to help families in every corner of America. First, we do need to create an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. There's something wrong when Latinos are 17 percent of our country's population but hold only 2 percent of its wealth. We've got to work together to connect more Latinos with good jobs that pay good wages, with more opportunities to get the skills they need, to go to college, to launch new ventures, to build wealth that can be passed on to your kids and your grandkids. So we're going to make, in my first 100 days, the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II, jobs in infrastructure, manufacturing, technology, innovative, clean energy.  And we're going to cut red tape and taxes and expand access to capital for small busi-nesses, including the Latino-owned small businesses that create so many jobs and so much growth in communities everywhere. And I want to give a particular shout-out to Latina small business owners. Not everyone knows this, but you are among the fastest-growing group of entrepreneurs in America. And we're going to put families first with new solutions that reflect the way people live and work today. Supporting families with paid family leave, earned sick days, and affordable childcare isn't a luxury, it's a necessity. When families are strong, America is strong. And that brings me to another important family issue. In those first 100 days, I will send a proposal for comprehensive immigration reform to the Congress. My proposal will keep families together, and it will include a path to citizenship. Now, I know this isn't the first time you've heard it. In fact, people have been making the same promise for more than a decade. But I believe with all my heart that some things are too important to give up on. I've been called a lot of things; I've never been called a quitter.  And in this election ... in this election, we have a chance to show that comprehensive immigration reform isn't just the smart thing to do, it's what the American people demand. And you know how we'll show that? Well, I hope to have a Democratic Congress next January. [Cheers.] But no matter what, on my first day in office I will reach out to Republicans and say, this is your chance to help millions of families and show that your party, the party of Lincoln, is better than Donald Trump.  And while we're fighting for comprehensive immigration reform, we're going to keep families together. When the deadlocked Supreme Court put DAPA and expanded DACA on hold for 5 million immigrants, it was devastating to millions of families. But the court didn't actually rule on the substance of the case. And as I've said repeatedly, I believe DAPA and expanded DACA are squarely within the President's authority, and will I protect them and keep fighting for them. But in addition to defending DAPA and DACA, there's more we can do. We need a simple, straightforward system where other people with sympathetic cases who are contributing to their communities can make their case and be eligible for deferred action too. Like people who experience and report extreme labor abuses. And we won't stop there. We're going to end family detention, close private detention facilities, and stop the raids and roundups. No child should have to say goodbye to their parents every morning not knowing if their mom or dad will be there when they get home. So here's the bottom line. Comprehensive immigration reform will not only be the right thing to do, but it will add $700 billion to our economy and enable America to be what it's always been ... a place where people from around the world can come to reunite with family, start new businesses, pursue their dreams, apply their talents to American growth and innovation. Now, I know this has been a long road and we wouldn't be where we are today without your persistence and the quiet courage of families in every state of our union, and we certainly wouldn't be here without the bravery of the young men and women who have risked their very place in the United States by coming forward and fighting for their own future and the future of millions of others. They helped change the conversation. And when President Obama created DACA, it changed their lives. Right now, 750,000 undocumented young people in America are going to school, working, and planning for their future. They're DREAMers in much more than name. I've met so many. I've listened to their stories. They've done everything we've asked of them and made our country stronger in return. So when Donald Trump promises to rip that all away on Day One, when he promises to round up and deport all of the 16 million people living and working among us, including American citizen children who were born here to parents who are undocumented, these are the faces I see. I picture Astrid Silva ... who I met in Las Vegas. Many of you know her story: She came to this country from Mexico at the age of four with nothing but a doll, a cross, and the dress she was wearing. Now she's in her 20s, advocating for the rights of everywhere. I picture a young man I never met, whose high school teacher wrote me a few months ago to share his story. His teacher told me that his former student was funny, enthusiastic, and patriotic. He played the drums in the school marching band and after graduation in 2005, proudly enlisted in the U.S. Army. Before shipping off to Iraq, he stopped by the school so everyone could see him in his new uniform. He was, his teacher wrote, 'as respectful and optimistic as any student who ever entered my classroom.' He was also a DREAMer, brought here as an undocumented child. He loved America, and hoped one day to earn his citizenship. But in April 2007, while on a mission in Baghdad, he was killed by an improvised explosive device. He was just 19. The Army called him a hero and he was posthumously granted the American citizenship he'd always wanted. All these years later ... his teacher still treasures his memory. And this teacher wanted me to know ... he wanted me to know that despite what Donald Trump may say, immigrants are not rapists and criminals. The truth is, this young man may not have been born here, but he represented the best values of our country. We teach our children that America is one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. Not just for people who look a certain way or worship a certain way, but for all. Everywhere I go, people tell me how concerned they are by the extreme policies and divisive rhetoric they've heard from my opponent ... from the racist lie about Mexican immigrants that launched his presidential campaign to his racist attacks on a federal judge. And every time we think he's hit rock bottom, he sinks even lower. His latest target? A minister in Flint, Michigan who respectfully asked him not to use her pulpit for political attacks. He called her a nervous mess. How insulting, how dead wrong. Reverend Faith Green Timmons is not a nervous mess ... she's a rock for her community in trying times, and she deserves better and so does America. And again today, he did it again. He was asked one more time, 'Where was President Obama born?' And he still wouldn't still say 'Hawaii.' He still wouldn't say 'America.' This man wants to be our next president? When will he stop this ugliness, this bigotry? Now, he's tried to reset himself and his campaign many times. This is the best he can do. This is who he is. And so we need to decide who we are. If we just sigh and shake our heads and accept this, then what does that tell our kids about who we are? We need to stand up and repudiate this divisive rhetoric. We need to stop him conclusively in November in an election that sends a message that even he can hear. We need to set the kind of example we want for ourselves and our children and our grandchildren Parents and teachers are already worried about what they're calling the 'Trump Effect.' Bullying and harassment are on the rise in our schools, especially targeting students of color, Muslims, and immigrants. At a high school basket game in Indiana, white students held up Trump signs and taunted Latino players on the opposing team with chants of 'Build the wall' and 'Speak English.' Donald Trump is running the most divisive campaigns of our lifetimes. His message is you should be afraid ... afraid of people whose race or ethnicity is different, or whose religious faith is different, or who were born in a different country. There's no innuendo or dog whistles anymore. It's all right out there in the open now. So we've got to come back twice as strong and twice as clear. Just this week, a mother in Florida wrote to me about her 11-year-old son, Francisco. He's proud to be American, Colombian, Ecuadorian, and Puerto Rican. As he calls it, a 'potluck' of Hispanic heritage. And Francisco has been following this election very closely, his mother told me. He wears his 'Love Trumps Hate' pin every day and refuses to take it off. When his father warned him that might make him a target for bullies, Francisco looked his father in the eye and he said: 'I was always told to stand up for myself and what I believe in. And I believe Trump is wrong.' And good for you, Francisco. That's what we have to do in this election, and that's what so many of you are doing already: standing up to the bullying and bigotry wherever it comes from. Together, we must send this resounding message, and we need to inspire a level of turnout that will help us win up and down the ticket. We've set an ambitious goal of registering and committing 3 million people to vote in this election that would not have otherwise voted, and we can't do it without you. Nearly half of Latinos in America are under 35, and we need you to show up and make your voices heard in this election. So we're going to keep asking for your help. Keep hitting the campaign trail. Please talk to your friends, your neighbors, your community ... everyone you see between now and November 8th. Tell them to go to hillaryclinton.com, or text JOIN, J-O-I-N to 47246 to get involved. This election is too important for anyone to sit on the sidelines, as we heard from Congresswoman Sanchez. So let's stand up for a future where we put families first. Where we build bridges, not walls. And yes, together we can prove love trumps hate. Thank you all very much." Now, before I came out, I had the great, great privilege of saying hello to someone, Ruline Steininger, who is ... is Ruline still here? I know she was going to try to stay. There she is. Hello, Ruline! Hello, Ruline! Ruline is a 103-year-old resident of Pleasant Hill who was born in 1913. I am so grateful for her support, and I don't know if any of you have seen the videos, both about Janelle and about Ruline. But I really do recommend that you see them both. Ruline talks about this long, active life that she's had and everything she has seen happen in America and the world. And I think it's important to have that perspective. So it's a great honor to have Ruline supporting me. I am so pleased. And she's going to go vote early today to make sure her vote counts.  I want to thank Dr. Andy McGuire for chairing the Iowa Democratic Party, fighting so hard to elect Democrats. And I want to lift up and thank our Democratic Senate candidate, Patty Judge. Where's Patty? Patty's out there fighting hard every single day, and she can use your help to make a strong case for her to go to the Senate. And Jim Mowrer, the 3rd District congressional candidate. Jim is running a great campaign, and we are really looking forward to having him in Washington. But that really depends upon everybody here and everybody across the great state of Iowa. Now, while we're meeting on this beautiful day here in Des Moines, I know our friends in Cedar Rapids and the region are once again facing the potential of flooding. I talked with the mayor. I talked with city council members and other leaders over the last day or so. They hope that they will not have the flooding. They took a lot of good precautionary measures. Our campaign, along with thousands of people, came out and helped to put the sandbags in to try to prevent flooding. And I told them that if I'm so fortunate enough as to be president, we're going to have a big infrastructure program, and we're going to help prevent flooding in places like Cedar Rapids.  Now, I also just want to say on a personal note I was terribly upset this morning to learn about a train crash in New Jersey. That's very personal to me. I live in New York. People commute into New York from New Jersey. We had about a hundred commuters injured and one died. I just want to send our thoughts and prayers to them because it's a horrible accident that ran into the depot and caused all kinds of damage. So I want to lift up the people of New Jersey and New York today. Now, we are starting to vote in Iowa today! And I saw my good friend Ruth Harkin, and she told me she was the first person in line to vote today. And we have, what, 40 days, 39 days, left. And each and every one of you have the chance to make sure that we keep our country on the right path. We have 40 days to win an election that's going to affect the next 40 years of our country. And you, every one of you, can make the difference in this election. Now, how many of you participated in the caucuses? Well, we've got a bunch of active Iowans here. Are you ready to go to the polls? Well, luckily, in Iowa you can start today. Lots of folks don't have that opportunity across the country. And a lot of our campaign volunteers are going to direct people right from this rally to early voting sites. We've got one right down the street. So when you finish here, you can go vote. And we can be on the path to victory here in Iowa. Any of you see that debate on Monday night? Well, one down, two to go. Well, I have to tell you, it was an extraordinary experience because I did get to say a few things about the positive agenda that we want to have for our country because I want this election to be about something, not just against somebody. And so I am going to close this campaign the way I started decades ago, fighting for kids and families because it's been the cause of my life. It will be the mission of my presidency because I know from my own experience that strong families are the base of a strong America. And I know from personal experience how important it is to give people the tools they need to make sure that they can go as far as their hard work, their talent, will take them. Now, you may have heard me say this. I started talking about this way back in the be-ginning of the campaign here in Iowa. But I was very fortunate. None of us picks our parents. But I really was fortunate. My dad was a Navy veteran, a small businessman, and he worked hard every single day to build a good life to provide financial security, a good, solid, middle class life. And I know how hard he worked because occasionally I'd go down to his print plant where he printed fabrics for draperies. And it was not a very big building. It didn't have any natural life. There were no windows in it. It's what he could afford. And there were two long tables. And he'd roll out the fabric, and then he would take a silkscreen. Any of you ever seen a silkscreen, an old-fashioned silkscreen? Not far from here there's a wonderful t-shirt store. Right? And they still use silkscreens for some of their printing. So he would take that silkscreen, and he'd put it down, and he would pour the paint in. Then he'd take a squeegee and he'd go across it. And then he'd lift it up, and he'd go all the way down the table. And if there was going to be more than one color, he'd do it all over again. And then when he finished, he would gather it up and put it in his car and he'd go deliver it to the customer who had ordered it. That's how I was raised to think about doing business. You do your best. You enter into a contract or an agreement. Somebody orders your goods or your services. And then they pay you for it. Right? And as I said the other night, one of the things that we have found out is that as his own campaign manager said about him, Donald Trump has built a lot of businesses on the backs of the little guy. Her words. And I have met people who have been the victims of his refusal to honor contracts, to pay what had been bargained for. I just am grateful that my dad never did business with him or somebody like him because we couldn't have survived all that. All that work, and then to be told we're not going to pay you, or maybe we'll pay you 10 cents on the dollar, or 20 cents? That's just wrong. What kind of person does that, takes advantage of dishwashers and painters and architects and glass installers and so many people? We've been looking into the records, and there's a long list of people who have been mistreated. I just don't believe that's the way we're supposed to treat each other in America. And that sure is not the way our president should be treating our citizens in our country.  Now, my mom had a very different story. My dad's father was a factory worker, but they had a strong family. My mom was abandoned by her parents and then sent to live with grandparents, and they didn't want her. So she was out on her own by the age of 14. She was working as a housemaid and a babysitter. And it may sound harsh, but I will quickly tell you that it was the first time in her young life that she ever was in a family that showed love and respect for each other. So for her, it was a gift. And then she got another gift. The woman she worked for knew that my mom wanted to go to high school. And so the woman said, 'If you can get up really early and you can get your chores done and get the little kids off to school, you can go to high school. But you'll have to come right back.' That may sound harsh for a 14-year-old, but for my mother it made all the difference. And that's exactly what she did for four years, and most days she had to run ... run ... to get there. But she didn't care because she wanted to get an education. So when I learned more about my mom's life, I knew that what I wanted to do was to stand up for kids and families, and especially for kids who've been left out or left behind in some way. That's why I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund and learned quickly that kids with disabilities were not in our public schools back then, and we worked to put together a coalition and convince Congress to pass the law, and boy, every day I am so thankful for your former Senator Tom Harkin, who made the rights and opportunities of people with disabilities the centerpiece of his distinguished career. So that's been my mission: How are we going to do more to help kids and families? And so when I talk about the economy ... because I think we have three big issues facing us. Number one, we need an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top, right? We need to keep our country safe and we need to lead the world with strong and steady leadership, in accordance with our values. And we need to bring our country together. We have to heal these divides. But when I think about the economy, yes, I want more new, good jobs with rising in-comes. I see my friends from the laborers here. We need to do work that builds our roads, our bridges, our ports, our airports, our tunnels, our water systems, our sewer systems. This is good, honorable work, and boy, do we have a lot of it in America. We are living off the investments that our parents and our grandparents ... and sometimes even great-grandparents ... made. If we're going to have a competitive economy, we need to be building America again. And we also need to do more advanced manufacturing. And some of the most exciting developments I saw throughout this whole campaign were right here in Iowa. I saw in your community colleges some of the most advanced training that I've seen anywhere in the country. And I met young men and women who were getting credentialed to be able to leave high school to get good jobs as machinists and tool and die makers, and as designers using 3-D printing. I was so impressed. And I think we need to do that across America. And we need to bring technical education back to our high schools. It was a mistake when we took vocational education out of our high schools. Another way that Iowa has influenced and inspired me is what you've done with clean renewable energy. Now, it wasn't a partisan issue in Iowa. It really got a big boost from your wonderful former governor, Tom Vilsack. But it's been continued over the years. And look at the results. Look how much energy you are getting here in Iowa from clean renewable sources, most particularly wind. Right? And look at the number of jobs ... it's nearly 10,000 jobs now that are related to that. Plus the renewable fuel standard, which has motivated people to be creative about using biological material and experimenting with cellulosic material. I was in the forefront of moving toward a clean renewable energy future, and I'm excited by that. I'm running against someone who thinks climate change is a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese. I know it's real. I believe in science. But I'll tell you what else is real. What's real are the economic opportunities, the new jobs and businesses we're going to create by assuming the responsibility to combat climate change, and the young people of our country are going to lead the way to doing that. Now, we also need to help small businesses. Iowa is filled with small businesses. It should be easier to start one, it shouldn't be so cumbersome to deal with all the multitude of regulations. We're going to try to streamline that process. Being the daughter of a small businessperson, I believe in giving people the chance to have their destinies in their own hands. And we're going to work hard. I want to be a first-class small business president, in honor of my dad, and I'm going to do everything I can to help you get started, and grow small businesses.  But while we're growing the economy, we need to make it fairer. And here are a couple of things I want to do. Let's raise the national minimum wage, so people who work full-time are not still in poverty. I've met ... you know, two thirds of the people on minimum wage are women ... and I've met a lot of minimum-wage workers right here in Iowa and across America. Sometimes they have to take two minimum-wage jobs, because a full-time minimum wage job will earn you $15,000 at the end of a full-time year of work. We also could give the biggest boost to incomes, and particularly family incomes, if we finally guaranteed equal pay for women's work. And the other thing I want to do is make sure more companies adopt profit-sharing, so if you helped to create the profits, all of you, not just the top executives, will be able to share in those profits. You know, at the debate the other night, one of my well-known supporters, Mark Cuban, was there in the front row. And he really, I think, unsettled my opponent. But I'll tell you, Mark Cuban's a real billionaire who actually uses profit-sharing, and not only while the business is ongoing, but one thing I really appreciate: first business he sold, he shared the profits with all of his employees. 300 employees became millionaires, because they had a boss who rewarded them for the hard work they did to make it a successful company, all together. And the final point I want to make about this is about family economics. You know, let's tackle the cost of childcare. Between 2000 and 2012, childcare costs went up 25 percent. Incomes barely budged, right? So we're going to increase federal investment, and provide more tax relief to working families, so no parent has to pay more than 10 percent of their income for quality childcare. Now, if you don't have small children or grandchildren right now, you might not realize the cost of childcare in a lot of states is more expensive than tuition at public colleges and universities. A lot of families are just so stressed out. The other thing I want to do is to finally have our country join the rest of the advanced economies, and provide paid family leave, so you can take care of your family members. Now, a lot of people think this is primarily about newborn babies, adopted babies, and of course that's a big part of it. Last year, in Newton, a mom said to me, I'm counting on you to know what it's like trying to take care of a newborn and having to go right back to work. Right? That's a lot of you. There you are. Okay. And I've got to tell you, I hear that all over. When my granddaughter was born and I was in the hospital with my daughter, I was talking to one of the nurses, and I said, so what is your biggest worry? She said, well, my biggest worry is that so many of these new moms have to go right back to work. Right back to work. But it's not just for babies. It's for sick children, sick spouses, elderly members of your family who are having health problems. There is nothing more important than caring for each other. And I will tell you, it is wrong to make it so difficult for American families. The other big expense for family economics is education. Every one of our children deserve good teachers and good schools, no matter what zip code they live in, right? And we also have to make college affordable. Yesterday in New Hampshire, I was with my friend and my former opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders. I am very proud of the campaign that Bernie and I ran. It was a campaign about issues, not insults. And we shared a lot of the same goals, even though we have different ways of getting there. And so after it was over, he and I sat down and we began to hammer out some ideas about what we could do together. And one of them was to make college tuition free for any family whose income is $125,000 or less. And to make it debt-free for everybody else, so that you only pay what you can afford to pay, without going into debt. Now, right now, Iowans hold more than $12 billion in outstanding federal student loans. An education should give you a boost, not hold you back. And we're going to offer relief to those of you who already have debt. We have 40 million people who already have student debt in America, 300,000 of them right here in Iowa. We're going to help you refinance. It is outrageous that you can get a home mortgage at 3 percent, a car payment at 2 percent, and I met people in Iowa who were paying 8, 10, 12 percent interest on their student loans. I'll tell you what. I am not going to let the federal government make a profit off of lending money to young people to get their educations. And college is crucial, but this is not said often enough. Four-year college is not, and should not, be the only path to a good job that supports a middle-class life. So we're going to have real apprenticeships, not the kind where you're told, 'you're fired,' but the kind where you're told, 'you're hired.' We're going to help more people in high school and community college on the job learn a skill. So I'm excited about what we can do together. I know so much of this campaign has been about, you know, whatever my opponent says, and who he attacks, and who he derides and denigrates. And the list is long. But it's not about that. It's about you. It's about your families and your futures, and each of us should be telling you what we intend to do in the job. Now, I have this old-fashioned idea. I'm asking for your vote. I should tell you what I'm going to do, what my plans are. So Tim Kane and I have actually put out this little paperback book. And I see somebody holding one in the front row. It's called, not surprisingly, 'Stronger Together.' You can pick it up at a bookstore or an airport, wherever they sell paperbacks. And you can see what we're trying to do, and where we're going to get the money to pay for it. And the simple answer to that is, we're going to make the wealthy and corporations finally pay their fair share to support America. Now, my friends, my opponent has a very different vision for America. He actually bragged about gaming the system to get out of paying his fair share in taxes, maybe not paying any taxes at all. And what I really find so disturbing about this is he spends all of his time just dumping on America. Calling us a third world country. Saying our military is a disaster. That everything about America is in bad shape. But then it's probably true, he hasn't paid a penny in federal taxes to actually support our military, or our vets, or our schools, or our roads, or our education systems. He actually is proud of the fact that he lets everybody else pay taxes. He says that makes him smart. Well, I'll tell you what, if not paying taxes makes him smart, what does that make the rest of us? My husband and I have put 40 years of our tax returns out into the public. You can go and look at them, and you can see that we've been blessed, and we're grateful for that. But we have paid the highest marginal tax rates, and we are glad we could, because we have both benefited from this great country of ours, and we want to pass that on to the next generation and the one after that. Donald Trump is also proud that he rooted for the housing crisis back in 2008 and -9. Think about that. Five million families lost their homes. And he rooted for it because he said he could make money off of it. He even said that it is just business. Well, what kind of person believes that ... that throwing people out of their homes, foreclosing on them, destroying the dreams of hardworking people is just business? Well, I'll tell you, that's a person who should never be president because they don't understand the American dream and how hard it is for people to make it. So look, I think after ... Thank you. I think after what we saw Monday night, we'll have two more debates to be able to contrast and compare. I have no idea what he's going to say the next time. But you know, I will spend some time preparing for it. But we can't do any of the things that I just talked about or anything that you see in our book without your help. The future of our country, the future of our economy and the future of our society will be on the ballot. It breaks my heart to see all the mean-spirited, divisive, bigoted things that are being said in our country. We can have our differences, for heaven sakes. We're Americans; that's in our DNA. But we should respect one another. We should listen to one another. That's the way we're going to get things done together. And so I want you to join this campaign. The election will be close, but we can win Iowa and we're going to win on November 8th. So if you can, text 'Join,' J-o-i-n, to 47246, or go to hillaryclinton.com and sign up to volunteer. If you're not sure if you're registered, see these signs, 'I Will Vote?' Iwillvote.com. You can go to iwillvote.com, put in your name and your address, to make sure you're registered. Because sometimes people get dropped off the registration lists and they are surprised when they show up to vote that they're not on it. So check that out. And then, vote, and get everybody you know to vote. And I hope that a lot of you will go to vote after today, after this beautiful rally we're having. Because we will prove that we are stronger together. And you know what else we'll prove? We will prove that love trumps hate. Thank you all very much." And I've got to recognize Joshua Simmons, who just introduced me. He is a civics teacher at Pompano Beach Middle School, and boy, are his students lucky to have him and his enthusiasm. And I want to also commend him for talking about his mother and how hard she worked, and his sister who he helped to raise. We really are stronger together, and that starts in families and neighborhoods and communities. Well, you heard from a lot of my friends who represent you, starting with my great friend and former colleague, your Senator Bill Nelson. And I am looking forward to working with Bill as we make sure to continue the progress that will move us all forward together. And I sure hope Florida sends some reinforcements to the Senate and elect Congressman Patrick Murphy. I think Florida deserves a full-time senator, don't you? And I want to thank my friend, someone who has just worked her heart out not just for her constituents but for Democrats across America ... Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz. And another great friend of mine going back more years than we care to remember ... I'm so pleased he's here with us ... Congressman Alcee Hastings. And I know that Congressman Ted Deutch, who represents this district ... is over in Israel for the funeral of a great, great man, Shimon Peres, and I want to thank Ted for all of his support and his hard work. Before I get started and really talk about everything that's at stake and what we have to do the next 39 days to make sure we win this election, I wanted to say a few words about the tragic passing of Jose Fernandez. When he left Cuba, he did not speak a word of English. He didn't let that stop him. He pursued his dreams. He wanted to and he became one of the best baseball players that Miami has ever seen. And he never forgot where he came from. He worked hard to give back to the community that had given so much to him. Jose's life really embodied the American dream, and at 24 years of age, he was just getting started. I'm sure you join me in saying that our thoughts and our prayers are with his family, with his fans, and everyone whose life he touched during his extraordinary career. I also want to mention another resident of Coral Springs, and that's a man named Bob Levinson. My heart goes out to Bob's family. He disappeared in Iran more than nine years ago, and it is long past time for the Iranian regime to provide us information about his whereabouts and let him return home to his family. Now, did any of you see the debate the other night? Well, I think it was pretty clear there are two very different choices for our country based on two very different visions of the kind of America that we want to have. My view is we are already great, and if we work together, we will become even greater in the years ahead. I believe America is an exceptional nation. My opponent believes America is in decline. I've never heard such a dark and divisive, terrible image of our country coming from someone running to be president of the United States. When he talks, I lots of times don't even recognize the country he's talking about. And why are we already great? Well, it is not just because of the size of our economy or the size of our military. It is because of our generosity; it is because of our ingenuity; it is because of the diversity of our country. I think our diversity is one of our strongest assets. This morning, I laid out my plan for more national service so that more people of all ages can serve America, serve their communities. Because America is great, when you really strip it all down, because America is good. And we can't ever forget that. I have laid out specific plans about how we're going to make our country even greater. I've actually got a book here with Tim Kaine, my running mate. I have this old-fashioned idea: if I'm asking you for your vote for president, I should tell you what I'm going to do. I shouldn't just talk in generalities and use rhetoric and never answer questions about what we can do, but to lay out how we're going to make the economy work for everyone, not just those at the top.  That means new jobs ... new jobs with rising incomes, jobs in infrastructure, jobs in advanced manufacturing, in innovation and technology, and yes, clean, renewable energy jobs. My opponent's only infrastructure plan is to build a wall. I love that he went down to Mexico and he choked. He didn't even raise it. He's been going around telling people for months, 'We're going to build a wall and we're going to make Mexico pay for it.' So he's sitting with the president of Mexico and he doesn't even bring it up. He finds it a lot easier to insult women than to talk to the president of Mexico about building a wall. I mean, really, who gets up at 3 o'clock in the morning to engage in a Twitter attack against a former Miss Universe? I mean, he hurled as many insults as he could. Really, why does he do things like that? I mean, his latest Twitter meltdown is unhinged, even for him. It proves yet again that he is temperamentally unfit to be president and commander-in-chief. I have said it before and I'll say it again: A man who can be provoked by a tweet should not be anywhere near the nuclear codes. So I'm going to keep talking about what we can do together after this election. Getting those new jobs. And I'll tell you, another area I want to emphasize is small business. As I said the other night, my dad was a small businessman. He made a lot of sacrifice and he worked really hard to give us a good, solid, middle-class life. I'm really proud of that. And I'm sure glad he never got a contract from Donald Trump, who stiffs small businesses, doesn't pay his bills to people like my dad. But we need to do more to get small business started and growing ... here in Broward County, throughout South Florida, across the state, and beyond. So as we grow the economy, we also have to make it fairer. I want prosperity to reach everyone, not just the privileged few. So we are going to raise the minimum wage be-cause if you work full-time, you should not still be in poverty. And you know, two-thirds of all minimum wage workers are women, most of them supporting kids. And if you work full-time on a minimum wage job, at the end of the year you've made $15,000. I think we can do better. And I think we should because we want everybody to have a chance to get ahead and stay ahead and go as far as their hard work and talent will take them.  Something else we're going to do is we are finally going to guarantee equal pay for women's work. Now, this is not, my friends, just a women's issue. If you have a mother, a wife, a daughter, a sister, who is working, it's your issue, too, to make sure she is paid fairly. That will raise family incomes. And then the third thing I want to do is to make sure ... to make sure ... more companies share profits with the workers who helped to create those profits in the first place. The other night at the debate, one of my guests was Mark Cuban. He was sitting in the front row. And one of the reasons I was proud to have him there is he believes in profit-sharing. He's always, in his companies, shared profits. And by the way, he is a real billionaire. And when he sold his first company, he shared the profits from the sale and 300 people who worked for him, who helped to make him a success, became millionaires. I want to lift up and use as examples business leaders like that, not somebody who stiffs contractors, who doesn't pay dishwashers and painters and plumbers and glass installers and architects and marble installers and so many else, but somebody who has the right attitude, that we're stronger together in business just like we are in government and America. And the other thing we have to do more of is to make sure that we help deal with some of the stresses that American families are facing. It is hard to balance family and work, isn't it? I think we can do better. I want to see us have paid family leave, earned sick days, affordable childcare, and affordable college that includes tuition-free and debt-free college.  Now, after the primary was over ... and Senator Sanders and I ran a tough primary, but you know what? I was really proud. We ran a campaign based on issues, not insults. He and I got together and we said, okay, what are we going to do to make sure that more young people can actually get a college education? Because right now, it's way beyond what a lot of families can afford. And if you go into debt, you come out of it with so much debt that remains a burden on you. So the other day Senator Sanders and I were up in New Hampshire together, and we were rolling out our plan. And it's pretty simple. You can go to my website, but let me just tell you briefly. If you are in a family that makes less than $125,000, you will not pay tuition to go to a public college or university. And if you make more than that, you will pay what you can afford, but you will not have to borrow money because it will be debt-free for you to go. And we put together a calculator on my website. You can go to hillaryclinton.com/ calculator and you can see how much you will save, how much your child or your grandchild would save under this plan. But I also believe a four-year college degree, which is an important part of getting an education to get ahead, should not leave you mired in debt. So we are going to help you refinance your debt, get the interest rates down, and if you're willing to do public service, national service, we're going to forgive your debt over time.  But not everyone has to go for a four-year degree. I want every person, not just young people but people who are looking for a different opportunity or may have to retrain ... I want to everybody to have a chance for a good, solid job. I think we made a mistake when we took vocational education out of high school. We need to put technical education back into high school. And we need to make sure that community colleges are free so that young people starting in high school can take courses at community college to get the training they need for a good job. And I want to see business and labor unions working together for real apprenticeship programs ... not the kind that lead to being told, 'You're fired,' the kind that lead to being told, 'You're hired.' Now, I'm excited about this. I really am. I am confident and optimistic about our country. We never get anything done if all we do is get down in the mouth and feel bad and complain and try to blame somebody for something else. That's not who we are as Americans. We need to lift ourselves up, and we need to roll up our sleeves to get to work to make sure that future is what it should be for our country. And while we're doing that, we're going to make sure that our country's safe and that America provides strong and steady leadership around the world. Sometimes, when I listen to my opponent, it kind of seems he doesn't know who our friends are versus our adversaries. He has this weird fascination with dictators. He's kind of signed up for the Vladimir Putin wish list. He doesn't care whether NATO falls apart, and he is really cavalier about other countries getting nuclear weapons. He said he doesn't care. Let Japan, South Korea, even Saudi Arabia, get a nuclear weapon. Whoa! That's the kind of dangerous, reckless talk that people around the world pay attention to. As I told him in the debate ... he actually said, 'Well, we may or may not defend our allies in Asia.' Words matter. And America's word matters. We have to be reliable and trustworthy. People have to count on us. And we've got a lot of work to do around the world. We need to work hard for peace and prosperity. We need to tackle climate change together.  Climate change is real. Florida knows that. My opponent thinks it's a hoax created by the Chinese. And what that means is he would not be able to take advantage of the economic opportunities that climate change presents. You see, some country's going to be the clean energy superpower of the 21st Century. I think it's going to be either China, Germany, or us. I want it to be us, and it can be us if we make up our minds for that to happen. Let's deploy a half a billion more solar panels. Let's produce enough clean energy so that every home in America can be powered by it. There's so much we can do together. And that means we've got to work with other countries and we've got to demonstrate that we support our allies, whether they're in Europe, the Middle East with Israel, or Asia, that we stand with those who stand with us. And then, finally, one of the next priorities that I have if I am so fortunate enough as to be your president is to bring our country together. I've got to tell you, look, disagreements, political disagreements, that's fine. That's who we are. I don't know any two people in America who agree on everything politically with each other. And I've known, been fortunate enough to know, a number of our more recent presidents. I didn't always agree with them either, including my husband. But I'll tell you this: Republicans and Democrats alike, I never doubt they were trying to put the country's interests first. They were trying to bring people together, not pit us against each other. And one of the things I will do from the very beginning, the very first day of my administration..."   Now ... so in order for me to do any of this, anything that's in this book and making sure that it's paid for by the wealthy and corporations who have to pay their fair share finally, all of that, depends upon whether we win in November. The stakes could not be higher. So here is what I am asking all of you. How many of you know you are registered to vote? So we need to get everybody to be registered at your current address by October 11th. If you've moved, you may need to reregister. Here's how you can find out if you are registered. You can go to iwillvote.com, iwillvote.com. You put in your name. You put in your address and make sure you're registered. If you need to get registered, we have volunteers here. Right? And they will ... they have ... they have clipboards. We're kind of low-tech about it. They have clipboards. They can help you get registered right here and now or, as I say, you can go to iwillvote.com and check your registration. And, remember, you can vote by mail starting October 24th here in Broward. And the other thing you can do is convince everybody you know to make sure they're registered and to help them know how to vote by mail so they could get their vote in without making any fuss or inconvenience. So make no mistake. This election is going to be close. They always are. So every call you make, every door you knock on, every person you register could make the difference. So I'm asking you to go ahead and text JOIN, text JOIN, J?O?I?N, to 47246 to get involved or go to hillaryclinton.com. And you can volunteer and become involved. If we win Broward County by as big a margin as we should win it, we win Florida. And, like I say, I'm not just excited about winning an election. I'm excited about doing the work. I'm excited about listening to Americans. I'll continue to travel our country. I'll be here in Florida so much you'll get sick of me because I want to be a good partner for Florida. I mean, Florida is already suffering from climate change, and you have a governor who ordered the state government never to say the word or write the phrase. That's kind of hard to believe. So there's a lot we're going to do together: jobs, rising incomes, opportunities. And that's what gets me excited. So here's what I hope you will do. When you leave here, if somebody says, 'Where were you this afternoon?' you say, 'Oh, I went to a rally for Hillary Clinton.' If they say, 'Oh, that's great," get them registered. If they say, 'Oh, my gosh. How can you do that?' if they're seriously thinking about voting for my opponent, stage an intervention, really, because, remember, remember, friends don't let friends vote for Trump. And what we believe and what we're going to prove on November 8th is love trumps hate. Thank you all so much." And I want to thank Eileen for her introduction. We know how hard that nurses like Eileen work, and now that she is retired, she is volunteering for our campaign. This woman never quit, and Eileen, we are so glad you are on our team. I am grateful to all of the elected officials, all of the commissioners, the county commissioners, Martin County, St. Lucie, for all you do for the community, but especially for all you did this summer to clean up the algae that polluted the water, that threatened wildlife and made life hard for local residents and businesses. This is a serious and complicated problem, isn't it, for the entire Treasure Coast. And it is a reminder, if we needed it, how important good leadership is. So, I thank all the leaders for their commitment. Now, there are just 39 days between now and November 8th. Just 39 days left in the most important election in our lifetimes. We've got to make every single day count. We have to get more people registered to vote, get more people committed to turn out to vote. We have to drive home the stakes in this election: stronger families, safer communities and an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. And underneath all of the rhetoric and the coverage and the back and forth, this campaign really comes down to two questions. What kind of future we want for ourselves, our kids and our grandkids, and how do we make it a reality? Now, as I said it the other night ... how many of you saw the debate? Well as I said, I now have two grandchildren, and no offense to anybody, the two most wonderful, amazing, extraordinary. A little girl and a little boy. So I think a lot about the future. And you may have noticed that my opponent and I have different views about ... well, nearly everything when it gets right down to it ... not just about what makes America great, because I think America already is great ... but about what we should do to make it even greater, and about that basic question about how progress happens at all. My opponent believes in what I call a 'strongman approach.' He stood on that stage at his convention and described a hopeless, broken nation. I am sorry, I am looking at you. I don't see that. That in no way resembles the strong, vibrant America I know. And here's what he said. He said, 'I alone can fix it.' I alone? Well, we have learned that that's his way. One person getting supreme power and exercising it ruthlessly. That's why he admires dictators like Vladimir Putin so much. But that's not how change happens in America. It's never just one person, not even someone as powerful as the president. Every good our country has ever achieved has always happened because people have worked together to make it a reality. Not just the wealthy or the powerful ... all of us. We see that every day across America, and I bet many of you have been a part of it. Maybe you taught kids to read, right? Or cleaned up your local park, or the beach, maybe you have organized a cancer walk, or you have run a food drive. Whatever it is, chances are you have done something to serve your community. And by extension, your country. How many of you ... just think back over your lives ... how many of you have performed some kind of service of some sort for your community, for other people. The reason I know you have is because tens and tens of millions of Americans do some kind of volunteering in your hometowns every single year. It's one of the best things about the American people. We are doers. We don't just shrug our shoulders when we see something that needs fixing, we don't get resigned or pathetic, or blame other people and turn on each other to find scapegoats. We roll up our sleeves, we get to work to try to make things better in our neighborhood, our community, our city, our state, our country. This has been our story, the American story, since the beginning of our nation, and it is still going strong today. Now, for many Americans, including a lot of you here, serving our country has included serving in our Armed Forces. People are starting to call out their services! There is no greater service or sacrifice, and we are grateful to our men and women in uniform, to their families and our veterans every single day. But what's so great is that national service can take many different forms, and it's something that I believe in so deeply, that every stage of our lives gives us the chance, from grade school through grandparenthood, to find a way to give back. We've got folks here today from AmeriCorps, which my husband created back in 1993, and I'll tell you, to this day, it is one of his proudest achievements. Because very day, AmeriCorps volunteers are out there. They're building houses, responding to natural disasters, helping people with disabilities find jobs, find safe places to live, and next week, on October 7th, AmeriCorps will celebrate a major milestone: their one-millionth member. I'll tell you, Bill is really excited about this and so am I. And by the way, AmeriCorps has one of the best swearing in pledges I have ever heard. Here's how it starts: 'I will get things done for America.' Isn't that great? I think we should make that a national slogan. Now we also have folks here today from City Year, which is part of AmeriCorps. And every day, they're working with students who are risk of dropping out of school. They're tutoring and mentoring and running after school clubs ... all to help young people really discover how capable they really are and to be empowered and to stay in school. I'm really grateful to them. We also have people here today from the Peace Corps, which represents the best of America to the world. Peace Corps volunteers are teaching English in Kosovo, staffing health centers in Nicaragua, supporting farmers in Nepal, distributing malaria nets in Uganda. Both as First Lady and as Secretary of State, I got to see the results of their work first hand. They are making the world a healthier, more prosperous and more peaceful place. Now, maybe not all of you have been a part of one of these programs, but I know you serve in different ways. Maybe you volunteer through your school, or with your church or synagogue. Maybe you find through faith-based opportunities, as I did when I was a teenager, service opportunities. Because for many Americans, service is part of our faith. My running mate, Tim Kaine, volunteered in Honduras with Jesuits as a young man, and it changed his life. Or maybe your whole family volunteers together, Bill and Chelsea and I, every holiday season, would work at a food bank back in Arkansas. However you serve, it feels good, doesn't it? To be part of something bigger than ourselves. To take our time and labor, and put it towards something good that can happen in our country and the world. And you know something very interesting? Service makes us happier, it makes us healthier, and there are studies proving that. It's not just how we feel, they've actually followed people. It can also help us find our next job, or our true calling in life. It's a smart way to use our greatest asset in life, our people. And service does something important for us as a society. Too often, we Americans can become separated from each other, and I think a lot of people are feeling this way during this election. It's easy to surround ourselves with only those that think like us, talk like us, look like us, read the same news as us, that's understandable to an extent. But it comes with a cost because it magnifies our differences, which then makes it harder to put those differences aside when our community or country needs us. There aren't many places where people of all ages, all races, all backgrounds, all beliefs come together in common cause. But service is one of them, and that's one of the reasons I think it's so valuable, because in addition to the good work it does, it helps us reconnect with each other to feel more a part of our shared American life. I believe that one of the jobs of President is to encourage more service, to help more Americans answer President Kennedy's call. You know it: Ask not what your country can do for you but what you can do for your country.' But sometimes it's hard to figure out. How do you make a difference, especially with everything else going on in our lives? And too often volunteering becomes something only people with lots of time and financial security can do. But that's not how it should be. Everyone should be able to contribute. So what if we, as a country, made it easier for everybody to do that, for everybody to give back? What if we created more service opportunities for Americans of all ages, invested in programs that work and encouraged entrepreneurs to add a social component to their businesses? What if we strengthened the culture of service in America so it wasn't just something that we did one day a year, but it became a regular part of our lives. I think that would reflect our values and would tap into something so great about America. I talk a lot about how America is an exceptional nation. We're not exceptional just be-cause of the size of our military or the size of our economy. We're exceptional because of the generosity and ingenuity of our people. Way back, nearly 200 years ago, a Frenchman came to the United States, his name was Alexis de Tocqueville. He was travelling around, trying to figure out, 'What is this new place called America? They fought a revolution. Who are they?' And he saw how we had set up our government, and we had three branches, and everything that our founders really put into place. But the thing that made the biggest impression on him was our spirit of volunteerism that made a democracy as diverse and ambitious as ours possible. If I'm elected president this fall, I want to build on that strength by making a major push in support of more national service. So here's what I plan to do. First, let's triple AmeriCorps. That was the goal of my friend and the great Senator Ted Kennedy. It was laid out in a law named in his honor, the Edward M. Kennedy Serve America Act. It's finally time we get it done. Every year there are hundreds of thousands of more applications for AmeriCorps than there are spots in the program, so if we grow the program from 75,000 annual members to 250,000, we're going to give more people who already want to serve the chance to do so. Then I want to double the college scholarships that AmeriCorps members earn through their service, and I want to find ways for more students to get college credit for service because I know too many talented, committed young people who pass up serving with AmeriCorps because, with their student loans, they can't afford it. So let's lighten that burden. If you do national service, we will begin a program to forgive your loans, because you are giving back to your country. And let's keep working to the ultimate goal of making it possible for any American to serve full time if they want to. Now second, let's grow the Peace Corps. Since President Kennedy launched it 55 years ago, it's given nearly a quarter of a million Americans the experience of a lifetime, and it's fostered friendship and cooperation between Americans and people in more than 100 nations. We've got to do more of that in the world today. We need more Americans of all ages around the world showing our values, serving people. So let's make it possible for more Americans to be a part of this extraordinary program. Third, let's expand service opportunities for people of all ages. Right? Now, let's be fair, the younger generation is way ahead on this. I've talked to so many young people who are deeply thoughtful about how your lives impact others and the world. Service isn't just something to do to check a box before graduation, it really is woven into your lives. And many who are just getting started in your careers, say that having a social impact is more important to you than getting a job that yes, may pay a salary but doesn't give you any meaning or purpose in your lives. Now I also want to get older Americans more involved. Service isn't something only students and young people do. I know that. So I intend to make sure that 10 percent of AmeriCorps slots go to Americans over the age of 55. Let's give people an encore opportunity after they've ended their formal careers so they can apply a lifetime of knowledge and experience to a stronger community. And finally, I want to create a new means for people to serve in serious, meaningful ways without a full time commitment. AmeriCorps is a full time commitment. The Peace Corps is a full time commitment. The Armed Forces are a full time commitment. But the Armed Forces has another model. The Reserves ... right? It gives people the chance to make a high impact contribution while still building careers and pursuing their dreams in other ways. So let's do something like that in the civilian space. Let's call it the National Service Reserve. And here's the idea. If you join the National Service Reserve, you will receive some basic training, just like you would in the military reserves, and then when your city or state needs you, you'll get the call. Say a natural disaster strikes and the Red Cross needs all hands on deck. Or maybe, like the crisis in Flint, and clean water has to be distributed every day to a lot of families. Or maybe your city launches a major public health campaign to reduce drug abuse or promote mental health. You will then be sent into action. Now some of these assignments maybe just be for a few days, a month, some might be longer term. But they will directly address a vital need in your own community. And one of the other advantages is you can help meet that need while still being a full-time student, having a job, taking care of your family. You won't have to make service your only priority. Our goal is 5 million people spread across all 50 states, and we will have an open door to people of all ages, but we want to put a special focus on people under 30 who've said again and again they want to have a bigger impact in their communities, but they can't leave their jobs, understandably. We'll work with governors and mayors, Republicans and Democrats, because I want this to be a true bipartisan, public-private partnership. I also want to include businesses, colleges and universities who have unique resources to offer. And because we want workers and students to know that as they make this contribution, their schools and their employers will have their backs. I really think a National Service Reserve could make a difference for cities and states. There's so much work to be done and so many people who want to help do it. So let's bridge that divide, get people working together in ways that can help communities. Now, I don't think you'll hear anything about this from my opponent. And you know what? I think that's a shame, because national service has always been a bipartisan goal. Of course, President Kennedy started the Peace Corps and my husband started AmeriCorps ... but President Nixon signed the Domestic Volunteer Service Act. President George H.W. Bush created the White House Office of National Service. And both President George W. Bush and President Obama have been huge champions of service. This should be something that we all can get behind. And when you listen to what's being said in this campaign, it can be discouraging, right? It can seem hard to find any common ground so it makes it even more important that we come together where, whenever we can. Now, I am well aware that candidates don't usually focus on national service in the final stretch of a hotly fought presidential election. Some might say, 'Well hey, my gosh, you've only got 39 days to go. Why aren't you just out there beating up on your opponent and doing everything to get the vote out and all the rest of it? Well, I'll do that, but ... I've been thinking about this for a long time, and I did not want this campaign to end without talking about it because it means a lot to me. I'm trying to end the campaign focusing on issues that are really close to my heart ... and this is one of them. Thank you! For me, service is really all about fulfilling the instruction of my Methodist faith, and you can see part of the creed I like to follow behind me: 'Do all the good you can, in all the ways you can, in all the places you can, at all the times you can, to all the people you can, as long as ever you can.' Now, I've carried those words with me ever since I heard them as a little girl, and it's an idea that really got into my head and my heart. But you know what's kept me going are the people that I've met. And in a country founded on liberty and equality, I can't think of a more important notion than every one of us is valuable. We all deserve respect. We all should listen to each other. We all can make our mark on the world. And when we come together in common purpose, we can do so much more than we could ever do on our own. That's why 'Stronger Together' is more than just a slogan. It's a course of action. So here's what I want to do. I want you to hear me pledge that this will be a vital aspect of my presidency. And I want you to help me bring our nation together ... to solve our problems, strengthen our communities. To join with people across America who care about service, because this speaks to both what is great and good about the United States. America is great because we are good. There are lots of examples. We are going to be putting examples up on my website of people who have served and who are inspirations. But I want everybody here to know that it can be done. We can do more, and we can provide the opportunities to enlist more people. There are so many examples in this community and communities across America ... 39 days left. This is the choice: do we lift each other up, or do we tear each other down? Do we listen and respect each other, or do we scapegoat, point fingers, and insult each other? Well, I'll tell you what side I'm going to be on, and with your help, we're going to demonstrate on November 8th, what kind of country we really are. Thank you and God bless you!" I am so [...] and so honored to be here. Thank you so much Reverend Dr. Walker. Thanks to the members of the Little Rock A.M.E. Zion. I have to confess ... we were putting together the [...] Rev. Walker was [...] But he told me his church [...] 134 years ago was founded in a house on a rock and that rock has been sturdy and steady [...] I am so delighted to be here with your Congresswoman, Congresswoman Adams, who has a [...] path in the Congress, such a [...] of conviction. And my thanks also to Donna [...] for her leadership for that stirring description [...] Thank you so much. This church for all those years has been a source of strength and solace, for generations of congregants and [...] It has helped people get [...]. It has helped people deal with the sorrows that come [...] and it has [...] the world outside challenged the faith that comes from belief. In here, in this magnificent house of worship, we pray for peace when there is too much violence outside of these walls. In here, we are called to confront injustice, even when the world out there fails to see it. In here, we see the world as it is, but we pray for the strength and wisdom to build the world as it should be. It has been 12 days since Mr. Scott was shot and killed. Twelve days since his wife Rakeiya Scott watched her husband die, and seven children lost their father. Now we don't yet know all the details about the shooting, but we do know this family and this community is in pain. And therefore we pray for them and we pray for all families who have suffered similar losses. But we do more than pray. As Ms. Bradford said, 'We do what each of us can do.' Not everyone can march, but everyone can talk, and everyone can reach out and everyone can vote. Too many African American families have been in the same tragic situation that the Scott family has found themselves. In fact, the day before Mr. Scott died, another father, Terence Crutcher, was killed in a police encounter in Tulsa, Oklahoma. And there have been many others. So many fathers and sons and even mothers and daughters who have died either after encounters with the police or at the hands of civilians with guns while they were doing things that were ordinary, everyday activities. Walking home from the store with iced tea and Skittles, listening to music in their car with friends. And we also know -- and we must not forget -- that violence has touched the families of police officers. Men and women who put on the uniform and put their lives on the line to protect others. From Dallas to Baton Rouge to Philadelphia, the families of fallen officers have also been dealt a great blow and they deserve our prayers as well. It's been a hard year, hasn't it? Think about how many times President Obama has had to console our nation about another senseless tragedy, another shattered family, another distressed community. And our children are watching, and they feel it too. You've seen that right here in Charlotte. Last Monday at the city council meeting, 10-year-old Taje Gaddy said, 'I wake up every morning scared that I won't get to grow up because I am black.' A nine-year-old, Zianna Oliphant, who's here with us today, along with her brother Marquis and her family, also spoke at that city council meeting, with tears pouring down her face. And when I read what she had said, I had tears in my eyes too. She said, 'We are black people and we shouldn't have to feel like this. It's a shame that our fathers and mothers are killed, and we can't even see them anymore. It's a shame that we have to go to their graveyard and bury them. We need our fathers and mothers to be by our side.' What courage and clarity that young lady showed to the world. But can you imagine, nine years old. She should be thinking about happy adventures, dreaming about all the wonderful things her future holds for her. Instead she's talking about graveyards. Our entire country should take a moment to really look at what's going on here, and across America, to imagine what we see on the news, and what we hear about, imagine through our children's eyes.  I'm a grandmother, and like every grandmother I worry about the safety and security of my grandchildren, but my worries are not the same as black grandmothers. They have different, and deeper fears about the world that their grandchildren face. It makes my heart ache, when kids like Zianna, are going through this and trying to make sense of the absolutely senseless. I know how I would feel. I wouldn't be able to stand it if my grandchildren had to be scared and worried the way too many children across our country feel right now. But because my grandchildren are white, because they are the grandchildren of a former president and secretary of state, let's be honest here ... they won't face the kind of fear that we heard from the young children testifying before the city council. You know, every child deserves the same sense of security, every child deserves the same hope. They should not be facing fear, they should be learning and growing, imagining who they can be, and what their contributions to our country could be as well. We've got to take action, we've got to start now, not tomorrow, not next year, now. We know we can't solve all these problems over night, which means we don't have a moment to lose. Proverbs tells us, 'Where there is no vision, the people perish.' So let's hold on to a common vision. Let's come together to make America a place where every child, no matter who they are, where they're born or what they look like, has the chance to live up to their God-given potential. Being stronger together with this common vision means rejecting those forces that try to pit us against each other. We can acknowledge that implicit bias still exists, not just in police departments but throughout our country, without vilifying police officers. We can call for reforms to policing, while still appreciating the many courageous and admirable officers out there who are doing their jobs with honor and integrity. I think about an officer named Montrell Jackson. You might not have heard of him, but I want you to. He was one of the officers murdered in Baton Rouge. A few days before he died, he wrote on Facebook, he was black but he wore blue. 'In uniform,' he wrote, 'I get nasty, hateful looks. Out of uniform, some consider me a threat. These are trying times. Please don't let hate infect your heart.' And then he closed by saying that if anyone saw him on patrol and wanted a hug, 'I got you.' Montrell Jackson knew that making our communities safer and juster are not conflicting ideas. And most officers will tell you they can't do one without the other. I believe we need end-to-end reform in our criminal justice system, not half measures but full measures, with real follow-through. In America everyone should be respected by the law and have respect for the law. That starts with being honest. Being unafraid to face the facts. Face the fact that black men are far more likely to be stopped, searched by police, charged with crimes and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men for doing the same thing. We need to fix a system where too many black parents are taken from their kids and imprisoned for minor offenses. We need to make sure our police officers are trained in de-escalating tense situations. We need to dismantle the so-called school-to-prison pipeline, and instead invest in education from early childhood through high school into higher education. And yes we have got to fight for common sense reforms to stop the epidemic of gun violence in our communities. Gun violence is by far the leading cause of death for young black men, more than the next nine causes combined. We've got to make sure there are good jobs, equality affordable housing in every zip code in America. We need to make investments in communities that have been left out and left behind. I am a strong supporter of Congressman Jim Clyburn's plan to put 10 percent of our federal funds into 20 percent of the communities that have generational poverty for 30 years or more. Now, there are some out there who see this as a moment to command the flames of resentment and division. Who want to exploit people's fears, even though it means tearing our nation even further apart. They say that all of our problems will be solved simply by more 'law and order.' As if the systemic racism plaguing our country doesn't exist. Now, of course we need safe neighborhoods, no one is against that. Of course, we need communities that are free from the epidemic of gun violence, of course we need that. But we also need justice and dignity and equality, and we can have both. This is not an either-or question for America. I want us to commit ourselves to this common vision. That is where I will build on the work that President Obama has done. And I will be sure that this is not just about a campaign or an election. This is much bigger than an election. These are issues I've been fighting for since I was a young lawyer working for the Children's Defense Fund. Going to South Carolina to try to get young teenagers, 13, 14-year-olds out of jails with adult offenders. I care deeply about this because it's not just personal to so many of us, it's about the kind of country you want to be and the future we want for all of our children and grandchildren. I think about that every time I see my grandchildren or every time I see a bright, energetic, impressive young woman like Zianna. Come up here a minute, would you? I love your dress. You know, God loves us all, right? We are called to care for and cherish each other. It's not easy, it is not. But that is our mission and that is what we are called to do, not only as Christians but as Americans, as human beings to understand and respect each other. To fight for each other's children, each other's dignity, each other's opportunity as if they were our own. Now, make no mistake, this is not easy work. You've been doing this since Adam and Eve came here. But it is righteous work. Protecting all of God's children is America's calling. Remember what scripture also tells us: 'Let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up.' We will not grow weary and we will not lose heart. We will get up every single day have faith in one another and in our future and work for that better day for all of God's people. Thank you." Now, I'm pretty excited about being here today. And I was especially honored to receive the endorsement of LeBron James. Now, I may become president, but he will be king of Ohio for as long as there is a king. I'm obviously delighted to be endorsed by someone who has demonstrated such leadership and such extraordinary ability. But I'll tell you what really moved me the most is he's given back to his hometown. He has advocated for small businesses, for kids, giving kids more opportunities. He's spoken out on behalf of criminal justice reform. He is someone who uses the platform he has earned because he has worked so hard over so many years to speak out and speak up for those who may not have a voice. So I am truly honored to have his support, and especially to be able to tell people in his hometown how I am looking forward not just to watch him play basketball, but to continue to be a leader in so many different ways. Now, we do have an important election coming up. Who here is planning to vote? Well, that is very good news because this is the most consequential election, I think, in our lifetimes. The choice could not be clearer, and we need everybody to show up. And how many of you still have to register to be able to vote? Everybody here registered? Well, I want you to talk to your friends because the deadline for registering in Ohio is October 11th. That's just a little over a week away. And if you're not sure whether or not someone you know is registered, or maybe you yourself want to be absolutely positive, you can go to iwillvote.com ... see that sign over there? You can go to iwillvote.com and confirm your registration and register if you need to. So let's get everybody you know to register and maybe start voting when early voting starts on October the 12th because we have just 36 days left. Thirty-six days, now, we are reaching out. We're making phone calls. We're knocking on doors. If you want to get involved, you can go to my website, hillaryclinton.com. Sign up to be part of this campaign in the next 36 days. You can text 'join,' j-o-i-n, at 47246, and get involved, because we are running to win Ohio in this election. And everybody, everybody in the campaign, is crisscrossing Ohio. My daughter's been here a bunch. Tim Kaine and his wonderful wife Anne have been here. My husband's coming back tomorrow for a two-day bus tour through Ohio. And I will be back because we care about Ohio and we want to make sure Ohio makes the best choice for the future of the people of this great state.  Now, I'm going to close this campaign the way that I started my career a long time ago, fighting for kids and families, standing up for people who may need a little extra boost in life, making sure that this country delivers on the promise of the American dream. See, I believe the American dream is big enough for everybody. If you're willing to work for it and do your part, you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead in America.  Now, my opponent and I have a really different view about what it takes to get ahead and stay ahead, and that may be because we have very different life experiences. And that's okay. People have different families, different views of the world. But here's what I have noticed. I have noticed that he always puts himself first. And maybe that's because he was born into a millionaire family. He started his business with a $14 million loan from his father. His father bailed him out; apparently that's a pattern, you got to be bailed out when you do business with him. And he then has taken advantage of every single element of our tax code, of our economy, that he could. And along the way, along the way, he has stiffed people ... small businesses and workers and contractors. And that's part of the reason I take this election so seriously. My dad was a small businessman. My grandfather was a factory worker. And so my dad, when he got out of the Navy in World War II, he started a small business. He started a printing business. He printed fabrics for draperies. And he worked really hard. He had a print plant in Chicago ... no natural light, no windows, just a long room where there were two big, long tables, and the fabric would be laid out on them. And then if you've ever seen silkscreens, that's what he did. You take the silkscreen. You put it down. You pour the paint in. You take the squeegee. You go across. You lift it up. You go down to the end of one long table, you start on the end of the other long table. And then, if it was going to be two colors, you would add another color, doing exactly the same thing. It was before there was machines. My dad couldn't have afforded that anyway. But he worked really hard, and he produced a good middle class life for our family. And so when I think about the way that my opponent has taken advantage of people, I got to tell you, I am really grateful my dad never got a contract from him, because I have met people he stiffed. I have met people. I'm talking painters and plumbers. I'm talking dishwashers, marble installers, glass installers, architects, a man who sold him pianos for one of his casinos. He wouldn't pay them. Now, you got to stop and ask yourself, what kind of person does that? Somebody who works hard and has a contract which they expect to be honored. And so I met one of the men. I met a man who had a small family business, installed the glass in one of those casinos, submitted the bill, and Trump said, no. we're not going to pay it. And the man was stunned, as so many hundreds and hundreds of people have been. And then they come back, the Trump organization or Trump himself, and say, okay, we'll give you 10 cents, 20 cents, maybe 30 cents on the dollar. Now, some of those small businesses, they couldn't afford that. They had bought the material, They had provided the services. Trump didn't care. He basically just walked away from them, made them feel like they had failed even though they had done the work they'd been asked to provide. I got to tell you, that is not the way we're supposed to do business in America. And I can't imagine having a president who believes that that's the way you're supposed to treat people. But you're going to help me make sure he never gets near the White House. Now, earlier today, earlier today in Toledo, I talked about all of the changes I want to make in how we can protect Americans from the kind of corporate fraud that we have seen too much of. Now, the most recent example is Wells Fargo. Wells Fargo actually had people, thousands of their employees, putting customers into accounts they either never asked for or they did not understand. And then every time they put somebody into a new account, they got fees, which then gave them the chance to get a bigger bonus ... a really crummy game that hurt people. So thankfully, we have an organization now, the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau in Washington, who looks out for people who get [...]. That is an important part of how we're going to protect. And it's run, you may know, by Richard Cordray from Ohio. Now, will it surprise you that Donald Trump wants to eliminate that agency? Well, we're not going to let that happen. That agency has already recovered $11 billion for consumers who've been taken advantage of by corporations. And the behavior of Wells Fargo shows clearly that we have got to keep the pressure on these big banks so they can never wreck the economy again the way they did back in 2008. I have said we're never going to let Wall Street wreck Main Street again, and I mean it. Contrast that ... contrast that with my opponent. He wants to do away with the rules that have been imposed on Wall Street. He basically wants to let Wall Street, the banks, the hedge funds, all these other institutions basically do whatever they want again. Well, I'll tell you what, we're not going to let that happen. We need more rules, not fewer rules on them.  I want us to make it easier to start a small business, to get rid of the red tape, to make credit available, to make it clear that most new jobs are going to come from small businesses in America, so we should have a big, dynamic small business economy. But we are not going to let big business and big corporations call the shots anymore. That is not working for us. But Trump's whole economic vision is really trickle-down economics. It's the same ... the same idea that has failed us before. You see, he believes that all you do is cut taxes on the wealthy and then it trickles down. Well, we know that doesn't work. We've been down that road. And what he wants to do is, I think it's fair to say, trickle-down on steroids. What he has proposed would slash taxes on the wealthy. Now, I'm a little confused about this because for a long time we've been saying, 'Hey, where are your tax returns?' A lot of us wondered what he was hiding. Because you know, if it was something that would make him look good, he would put them right out there. Everybody who's ever run for president in at least the last 40 years has released their tax returns. My husband and I have about 40 years of tax returns out there. You can go and look at them and you can see that we paid a lot of taxes, and frankly, we were grateful we could. We are grateful for the blessings that we've had over the last 15 years.  So did any of you see the debate last Monday? Well, I raised it. I said, 'Well, maybe he doesn't want us to see that he owes hundreds of millions of dollars to foreign banks and foreign lenders, or maybe he hasn't paid any taxes.' Now, shortly after the debate, it was discovered that, indeed, back in the 1990s he apparently lost a billion dollars on bad investments and failing casinos. Ask yourself this: Who loses money on casinos? Really. And yesterday some of his supporters said, 'Well, it just shows he's a genius that he didn't pay any taxes.' Well, what kind of genius loses a billion dollars in the first place?  In the debate, he said not paying taxes made him smart. But think about what that means. It means that all the rest of us who pay our taxes, right ... what's he saying about us? But more than that, zero taxes means zero for our vets, zero for our military, zero for Pell Grants to send young people to college, zero for health, zero for education. And you stop and ask yourself, this is the same person who's been going around really just dumping on America. He says our military's a disaster. Well, he could not be more wrong, but thank goodness the rest of us paid to support our men and women in uniform who have done so much for us. Today in Colorado, he claimed he brilliantly used the laws to avoid paying taxes. Well, that just shows, number one, he is the poster boy ... the poster boy ... for the same rigged system that he would make even worse. Just think about it. He paid zero at least for about 20 years, we believe now based on what we know. And he's advocating for huge tax cuts that would help him and his family even more. What's he want us to do, pay him to lose money? Really? There's a lot more to this story, and we're just slowly getting it into the public eye. So we know he's stiffed people, didn't pay his bills. We know he took bankruptcy, depending on how you count, four or six times. You know that he paid no taxes for probably 20 years. We don't know what his taxes would be after that. He's always talked about how he can't release his taxes because he's under audit, but he admitted everything before 2009 is not under audit, so Donald, release everything up until 2009. Show the American people your taxes. I'll tell you another thing. If I'm fortunate enough to be president, we're going to pass a law requiring anybody who is a nominee of a major national party to have to release their taxes. So what did we find out today? Well, a story just came out saying that Donald Trump used Chinese steel and aluminum for two out of the last three construction projects. So instead of buying his steel and aluminum from American plants here in Ohio and Pennsylvania, instead of supporting hardworking families and American jobs, he once again stiffed us. He sent that money overseas. Now, he spends a lot of time bashing the Chinese, right? You hear that all the time when he talks. Well, it turns out he bought his steel and aluminum from the Chinese. It turns out he owes big money to the Chinese. So this is another one of the episodes of his reality television show, where he is saying one thing and doing something else. Now, for years, China has been undermining American businesses and workers by illegally dumping cheap aluminum and steel into our markets. You know that, right? And it sounds like Donald Trump has been buying that dumped steel and aluminum. How can he make America great again when he won't even buy American products in our country?  And I'll tell you, this is personal to me, because as a senator I went before the International Trade Commission on behalf of steel workers in New York who I represented. And as Secretary of State, I went toe-to-toe with the Chinese. I have put forward an agenda to crack down on trade abuses from countries like China, to stand up for American workers, and to rebuild American infrastructure with American materials like steel and aluminum. And today in Toledo I pointed out, because Chrysler just announced an expansion of the plant there for the new Jeep Wrangler ... about 700 more jobs, right? I pointed out when the automobile industry was flat on its back and 850,000 workers in Ohio could have been absolutely out of a job ... more than we can even imagine in terms of the long-lasting impact on the economy here ... Donald Trump said he didn't care. Save it, don't save it; didn't matter to him. Well, I'll tell you where I stood. I stood in favor of saving the American automobile industry. And look what we got. Last year, our auto industry had the best year they've had in a really long time. And so we've got to keep building it. We've got to keep making sure that there are good jobs. And we've got to protect good union jobs against the kind of assault that is coming from all sides. So now, I know that Ohio is a tough, tough state. You've got to get out there. You've got to talk to people, answer questions, make your case. That's what we've been doing. That's what we're going to do all the way to the end of this election. But I need your help to talk to anybody you know here who thinks they might be voting for Trump. I know you know people. I know you do. And you've got to stage an intervention. You've got to sit them down and point out how everything he says he wants to do is absolutely opposite of what he has done, and how everything he has proposed will help people like him and his family but not the vast majority of families in Ohio. In fact, if you look at his tax proposals, they benefit him and other wealthy people ... hedge fund managers and the like, and they would actually raise taxes on middle-class families.  Now, that's the kind of contrast we're getting out in the campaign, but that's why we need your help ... to make sure you go out and talk to everybody. And I know people want change. That's part of the American dynamic spirit. We want change. Well, I'll tell you, one thing that is certain is we'll have change ... it's just what kind of change. It's whether or not we have change that helps the vast majority of Americans, hardworking Americans, middle-class families, or continues to only help those at the top. I want an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. And that's exactly what we're going to fight for, and that is what we're going to get. I'll tell you, I've been called a lot of things. Right? I've never been called quitter. If I tell you I'm going to get up every day and fight for you, that is exactly what I will do. But I know I can't do it ... I can't do it alone. Donald Trump stood on the stage of his convention and just once again painted this dark and dire picture of America. And then he said, 'I alone can fix it.' He gets confused between leadership and dictatorship. He has a hard time remembering who our friends are and who our adversaries are. He has a weird fascination with dictators like Vladimir Putin. We have a lot of people living in this part of Ohio who either themselves or their parents or grandparents came from countries that were under the yoke of oppression, and we're never going to let that happen again. And so when Trump basically signs up for Putin's wish list, that's bad enough. But then, when he's cavalier ... and I'm not talking about basketball ... when he is cavalier about nuclear weapons, saying that, oh, he doesn't care if other countries get them; in fact, you know, if there were a nuclear war in East Asia, if Japan got nuclear weapons, if South Korea got nuclear weapons, hey, just go at it, folks. He even said he wouldn't care if Saudi Arabia got nuclear weapons. One thing that has been a bedrock of American foreign policy through Democratic and Republican presidents going back to the dawn of the atomic age is we were committed to trying to keep other countries from getting access to nuclear weapons, to be able to stop proliferation. And now it's even more important because it's not only states that we have to worry about, like North Korea; we've got to worry about terrorists getting their hands on nuclear weapons. The last thing we want to do is just act like it doesn't matter, because it does. I was involved in putting together the sanctions against Iran that drove them to the negotiating table. And what I learned ... if you use diplomacy and you're tough about it, you can actually get an agreement that put a lid on their nuclear program. And we're going to make sure they follow it to the period, the comma, everything in that agreement. I'm going to enforce. And we still have challenges with Iran, but I think we're in a stronger position given the fact that they are not racing for a nuclear weapon because we have intrusive inspections. So I know diplomacy can work because I've done it, and I know that ... we can defeat ISIS and the terrorists if we work with other nations, if we have a coalition that actually takes them out from the air, takes them out on the ground, and fights them online where they are doing so much damage by radicalizing and recruiting young people. I've been laying out my plan for what I think it will take to defeat ISIS, and I have no doubt we will. And Donald says he has a secret plan. That he won't tell us about. Well, there's no secret; he has no plan.  And we've got to do more ... we've got to do more to make sure we protect our country. We need the best intelligence we can get, the best cooperation among law enforcement at all levels of government. I will not rest. As a former Senator from New York on 9/11, I take this as a personal responsibility. I will do everything I can to keep our country safe and to work with others to defeat the threat posed by terrorism. And finally, my friends, we've got to bring our country back together. There is too much divisiveness, too much finger-pointing and scapegoating. Our diversity is one of our strengths. We have to listen to each other. We don't have to agree; that is not required. But we need to be respectful. We need to listen. And then we need to roll up our sleeves and get to work. When I was First Lady, Senator, Secretary of State, I worked to find common ground with everybody. I worked when I was First Lady with Republicans and Democrats to create the Children's Health Insurance Program that insures eight million kids. When I was in the Senate, I worked with practically every Republican I served with. And they all have nice things to say about me when I'm not running for something. And I will work again to move our country forward and to change the [...] of that. And we had to get 13 Republicans, and I worked tirelessly and we got them. We did that. There is a lot we can do if we start listening and respecting each other and avoid the kind of name-calling and insults that we see too much of. So I'm excited about the campaign, but I'm even more excited about getting to work for you ... being able to get up every day and find a way to try to help somebody. I mean, that is how I was raised in my church and by my family, and that is what I have done through my advocacy work and my legal work on behalf of people who needed a voice. And I will do everything possible to make sure I deliver results for you. And the reason that I have published a book with my great running mate, Tim Kaine ... it's right here ... is real simple: I want you to know what we say we're going to do, because I want you to hold me accountable. I don't believe in bait and switch, where I say, oh, we're going to do something and then I really am over here doing something else. That kind of reminds you of somebody, doesn't it? No, here's what we're going to try to do. We're going to pay for it by raising taxes on the wealthy and closing loopholes on corporations. And I am the only candidate who ran this whole campaign saying I will never raise taxes on the middle class. That is not going to happen when I am president. So please join this campaign in the last 36 days. Talk to your friends. Remember, friends don't let friends vote for Trump. I am motivated every day because now I'm a grandmother ... two beautiful grandchildren ... and I think about their future, I think about their lives, I think about our country. I want our country to be the land of opportunity. The place where dreams do come true if you're willing to work for them. Not just for my grandchildren, but for every child. I want every child in this country to have a chance to live up to his or her God-given potential. And if you will help me win this election, and then help me work to make it come true, we will have a country that delivers on our dreams and a future we can all be proud of. Thank you and God bless you!" I want to acknowledge ... we have an overflow crowd in another room, and I know they can hear us, but we're glad they're here. I want to thank your Congresswoman, Marcy Kaptur, for her leadership and her grit. I want to thank Mayor Paula Hicks-Hudson. And the mayor told me there's a young man here who just won a boxing championship, Robert Easter. Where's Robert Easter? There you are, Robert Easter. Congratulations. I know Toledo is proud of you; we all are. I want to thank Kenyetta for that introduction. Do we have any other UAW members here? It's a great day to be here in Ohio for a lot of different reasons. One is I am so thrilled that LeBron James has endorsed me and joined our campaign. I know ... I've gotten a lot of wonderful endorsements over the past year and a half. I'm grateful for each and every one of them. But I got to say, there's something special about this one. And it's a real honor in part because of why he chose to endorse me. Now, not everyone knows this. I mean, you all know what an amazing athlete he his ... MVP, winner of championships ... but he's also ... LeBron is also a dedicated advocate for children. And this afternoon I'll be in Akron, where he's done so much for the kids in that community. It's a deep, personal commitment that he has that I share with him. We both believe every single child should have the chance to live up to his or her God-given potential. I could not be prouder to have LeBron joining our team as we head into the homestretch. Now, one thing I know ... I'll just say it because I know it's for sure ... I hope to be elected president, but I know here in Ohio LeBron will always be the King. I was listening to Kenyetta introduce me, and I really appreciated what she said, because Toledo is the kind of place where people work hard, look after one another, and yes, pay their taxes, right? You recognize that we all have to do our part because we are all in this together, and it matters. We believe honest work deserves honest pay. We believe everyone should have the right to join a strong union that will always have your back. It's personal for me. I'm the granddaughter of a factory worker from Scranton, Pennsylvania. He went to work in the same lace mill every day for 50 years. He believed he passed it down to my dad, who passed it down to me that if he did what he was supposed to do, he'd have a good life and his kids would have an even better life. That is the American dream. That is what we believe in. That's what we've got to keep going generation after generation. And because of my grandfather's hard work, my dad made it to college. And then after serving in the Navy during World War II, he started his own small business, printing fabric for draperies. As a young girl, I'd sometimes go to his print plant. It was a long building, no natural light, no windows, but he had these long tables where he'd roll out the fabric and then I'd watch him work with silkscreens, if you've ever seen that. He would take the silkscreen, he'd put it down, he'd pour the paint in, he'd take the squeegee, go across all the way down to the end of one table, then over to the next table, all the way back. And then if there was a second color to be added, he would do that. He sometimes let me help with the squeegee. That was my favorite part. And I know he worked really hard. He worked really hard. He believed in hard work. He passed that on to me. He provided a good middle-class life for us. So I am proud to stand with hardworking families all over Toledo, Ohio, and America, who should have the same chance that I did to share in the American Dream, which should be big enough for everybody. Fighting for kids and families has been the cause of my life, as Kenyetta said, when I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund all those years ago. And it will be the mission of my presidency, because I want to focus on what are called kitchen table issues, the ones that keep you up at night ... like the cost of child care, and college, and prescription drugs, and so much else. And that means we've got to create more good jobs with rising incomes. That means we've got to have good schools in every zip code. That means everybody willing to work ... and I say that very clearly; you've got to be willing to work ... and if you're willing to work, you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead. That is the basic bargain. Now, I don't know about you, but you wouldn't think that the theme of my campaign, 'getting an economy to work for everyone, not just those at the top' would be controversial ... and yet this is one of the defining debates not just of this election but of our time. Now, I will say, most American companies ... most ... are run by honorable, patriotic people who care about their employees and communities. But there are still too many powerful interests fighting to protect their own profits and privileges at the expense of everyone else. [Applause.] And they are aided and abetted by the rules and incentives in our economy who actually encourage people at the top to take advantage of consumers, workers, small businesses, and taxpayers. That makes it tougher for the well-meaning CEOs to take the high road. And it gets even harder when we don't aggressively enforce the rules, when we don't enforce trade rules that allow other countries with lower wages and standards to get an unfair leg up, when we don't enforce rules on Wall Street, which exerts enormous pressure on publicly traded companies to prioritize boosting share prices in the short term over building real value, investing in workers, plant, and equipment over the longer term. And let's be honest, the tax code rewards corporations for outsourcing jobs and their profits overseas instead of investing here in the United States. And it is riddled with loopholes that let the rich get even richer and make income inequality even worse. It tilts the playing field further against small businesses that can't afford lawyers and lobbyists. So with all these pressures pushing in the wrong direction, it's even more important that we have an election about these very issues. Because what I know will happen ... if we have an election where we have an agenda that actually would begin to level that playing field, we will rebuild the middle class, we will make work pay, we will create greater opportunities for a great percentage of Americans. Now, I know how hard this, but I think we are on the cusp, if we win this election, to be able to get these things done, right?"   We've got unmatched talent, innovation, entrepreneurial spirit. So when we work together, we can all benefit. Now, I believe corporations that benefit from everything America has to offer should feel some sense of responsibility not just to their biggest shareholders ... but to their workers, to their customers, to their communities, and yes, to our country, to the United States of America. We have been moving off track for decades. I don't need to tell you that. You know it, you've lived it, you've seen it. But it is time to get back on track. And you can ask anybody who's ever worked for me or worked with me, who's ever served with me, when I tell you I'm going to try to do something, I will get up every single day and work my heart out for you. So let's begin by making it clear that for most businesses, America is the most important asset on their balance sheet. This country of ours, this system of ours, the rule of law, the opportunity to get an education and go as far as your hard work and ambition will take you. And we created the biggest engine of economic growth in the world, the American middle class. So when we middle class thrives, the country thrives. And when it doesn't, we don't, right? And I'm going to use the White House and every tool at my disposal as your president to make the case that patriotism is profitable. Standing up for America, investing in America will pay off. Now, we have always had innovators and entrepreneurs who build great companies and create real value. But we should not and we will not respect those who get rich by cheating everybody else. So today I want to send a clear message to every boardroom, every executive suite across America: If you scam your customers, exploit your employees, pollute our environment, or rip off taxpayers, we will find ways to hold you accountable. But on the other side ... on the other side, if you do the right thing and you invest in your workers and your communities and our country's future, we will stand with you. That is the choice. Our goal is to make it easier for everyone to do better. Now, to understand why this is so important, consider the recent examples we've seen of egregious corporate behavior. Look at Wells Fargo. Really shocking, isn't it? One of the nation's biggest banks bullying thousands of employees into committing fraud against unsuspecting customers, secretly opening up millions of accounts for people without their consent, even their knowledge, misusing personal information, and then sticking customers with hidden fees. It is outrageous that eight years after a cowboy culture on Wall Street wrecked our economy, we are still seeing powerful bankers playing fast and loose with the law. And then in a category by himself, there's Donald Trump. Well, you may have heard that he has long refused to release his tax returns the way every other nominee for president has done for decades. You can look at 40 years of my tax returns. I think we need a law that says if you become the nominee of the major parties, you have to release your tax returns. Now, a lot of us were wondering, what is he hiding? It must be really terrible. Well, The New York Times has discovered at least part of the answer. Back in the 1990s, Trump apparently lost a billion dollars in a single year on bad investments and failing casinos. Now, how anybody can lose a dollar, let alone a billion dollars, in the casino industry is kind of beyond me. It's just hard to figure. But as a result, it doesn't look like he paid a dime of federal income tax for almost two decades. Now, while millions of American families, including mine and yours, were working hard paying our fair share, it seems he was contributing nothing to our nation. Imagine that. Not fair. Nothing for Pell Grants to help kids go to college. Nothing for veterans. Nothing for our military. And you know, he has been dissing America in this whole campaign. Right? He talks us down. He makes disparaging comments about our country. He calls our military a disaster. Well, it's not, but it might have been if everybody else had failed to pay taxes to support our brave men and women in uniform. I saw a newspaper article. A gentleman named Steve Crouse, who owns the Glass City Caf.. here in Toledo, summed it up pretty well in this article. He said, 'I would feel guilty if I didn't pay anything. It's flat-out cheating the government.' Now, my friend Bernie Sanders was right yesterday when he said Trump reflects a distorted view of the American people and what this country is all about. Trump represents the same rigged system that he claims he's going to change. The whole story tells us everything we need to know about how Trump does business. After he made all those bad bets and lost all that money, he didn't lift a finger to help and protect his employees, or all the small businesses and contractors he'd hired, or the people of Atlantic City. They all got hammered while he was busy with his accountants trying to figure out how he could keep living like a billionaire. And all the while he was using his political connections to collect hundreds of millions of dollars in government subsidies and extra tax breaks for his companies. In other words, Trump was taking from America with both hands and leaving the rest of us with the bill. Now, he says that he's the one who can fix things, but that is like letting the fox guard the henhouse. Right? And here's what I really am just stunned by. I get stunned every day in this campaign. But here's one of the many things that I'm stunned by. He has put forth a tax plan that would cut his own taxes even more. It would be like you're paying zero. You expect us to pay you to stay in business, all the rest of us in America? He'd open the loopholes even wider. And according to a new independent study, he would actually ... listen to this, people, because this is a real shocker ... his plan would actually raise taxes for millions of middle class families. And you know the people it would hit the hardest? Are single parents, whose lives and challenges he doesn't care about, certainly doesn't understand. Now, many have likely already spent years paying more than he did, and he now would make that even worse. And what does he say about it? Well, did you all see the debate last Monday? Well, in the debate ... in the debate ... well, then you all know that in the debate he said it was smart to avoid paying taxes. Yesterday his campaign was bragging it makes him a genius. Here's my question: What kind of genius loses a billion dollars in a single year? This is Trump to a T. He's taken corporate excess and makes a business model out of it. He abuses his power, games the system, puts his own interests ahead of the country's. It's Trump first and everyone else last. And there are lots of principled, law-abiding business leaders out there who are horrified by all of this. Not a single ... not a single CEO of a Fortune 100 company supports Trump's campaign. Think about it. I've been endorsed by very successful people ... Warren Buffett, Mike Bloomberg, Mark Cuban. I loved what Mark Cuban said when he endorsed me. He said, 'Look, I've been successful.' He actually is a real billionaire. And you know what? He used profit-sharing to help his employees, not bankruptcy to fire people. And when he sold his first company, he shared the profits with his employees, and 300 of them became millionaires. That's the kind of business practices I want to see more of in our country. But here's what we've got to do. Even if Trump is like one of a kind, we've got to reverse the broader trends he represents. It's time to rewrite the rules and make this economy fair for everyone. And today I want to briefly share with you my plan for protecting taxpayers, consumers, small businesses, and workers. We're going to crack down on the worst corporate abuses and empower companies willing to take the high road and invest in good jobs, in higher wages, and in stronger communities. First let's start with protecting taxpayers and making sure we have more fairness in the system. It is wrong that corporations and the super-wealthy play by a different set of rules. A Wall Street money manager should not be able to pay a lower tax rate than a teacher or a nurse. And I'll tell you something else. Our largest companies should not be able to get away with paying hardly anything at all. It is insulting when they engage in these games, like moving their headquarters over to a foreign country ... on paper, not in reality ... just to take advantage of lower tax rates. And it is infuriating when they take tax breaks with one hand and give out pink slips in America with the other hand.  So here's what we're going to do. We're going to close those loopholes. I've got a list of them we're going after. We're going to make Wall Street corporations and the super-rich start paying their fair share of taxes. We're going to pass something called the Buffett rule, which means multimillionaires cannot lower rates than their secretaries and other people working for them. We're going to put in place a new exit tax. If companies try to leave our country to avoid paying their fair share, if they try to outsource jobs, they're going to have to give back every tax break they ever received in our country. And then we're going to put that money to work creating opportunities here in America. Second, we're going to protect consumers. No American should ever be taken advantage of, like thousands were, by Wells Fargo. And this isn't a new fight for me. As a Senator, I raised the alarm about subprime mortgages. I fought to hold reckless managers accountable for toxic toys and household products that threaten our kids. I introduced legislation to protect Americans' personal data and combat identity theft. So as president, I will make consumer protection a top priority across the entire government. And that starts by defending and empowering the Consumer Financial Protection Bu-reau, which was created after the financial crisis. And the principal person who got it created was Senator Elizabeth Warren. And under the leadership of Ohio's Rich Cordray, the agency has already returned more than $11 billion to more than 15 million Americans who were ripped off by predatory lenders, credit card companies, and others. And it is the one making sure that the defrauded Wells Fargo customers get their money back. Now, I got to say I am so proud of what this new agency has done. Sometimes people say, well, what does the government really do? Well, there's a lot of examples, but this is a primary one, standing up and making sure consumers get paid back when they are ripped off. And because of its success, Republicans in Congress keep trying to shut it down. And Donald Trump agrees with them. In fact, he wants to scrap all the tough new rules imposed on Wall Street after the crisis. Well, not on my watch, Donald. We're never going to let that happen. Now, instead of gutting consumer protection, we should be expanding it. And we should build on the Dodd-Frank financial reforms and go even further because Wall Street can never, ever be permitted to threaten Main Street again. And the Wells Fargo scandal sheds light on another threat to consumers that we have to address. When the scam's victims, people like you and me, who had accounts there tried to sue, they were shocked to learn there was a provision in the very fine print of their contracts that kept them from going to court to sue the bank for being cheated. Instead, they are forced into a closed-door arbitration process without the important protections that you get in a court of law. We are not going to let corporations like Wells Fargo use these fine print "gotchas" to escape accountability.  And in fact, this is now common practice across a lot of industries ... from nursing homes, nursing homes that mistreat seniors, to for-profit colleges that defraud students. Who reads all that fine print? I don't. And you get defrauded or you get mistreated, and then all of a sudden they say, 'Well, you can't sue us.' So we're going to rein in that abuse across everybody. We also see a similar problem in some international trade agreements, like the Trans-Pacific Partnership. It sets up a dispute resolution system that favors large corporations over everyone else. It's one of the reasons I'm against it. I've warned about this for years, I've written about it, and I oppose TPP now, I will oppose it after the election, I will oppose it as president ... because it is one-sided and unfair to American workers. And what about all those pharmaceutical companies that jack up prices for no reason? We're going to have to protect ourselves against that too. And when we find unjustified spikes in the prices of longstanding, life-saving drugs, we should slap penalties on companies trying to cheat people who need those drugs. And let's finally import safe alternatives from other countries, like Canada, and speed up approvals to get more generic drugs on the market. And it is long past time to allow Medicare to negotiate for better prices for drugs and get the cost down for Medicare recipients. And I believe we should cap the amount working families pay out of pocket every month for medicine. No one should ever have to choose between paying the rent and filling their prescriptions.  So let's stand up for taxpayers. Let's stand up for consumers. And let's stand up for small businesses, which create most of the jobs in America. I take this personally be-cause of my dad's very small business. We need fair rules of the road so big corporations can't use their power to gain unfair advantages. Now, when it comes to bullying small businesses, Donald Trump is the poster boy. I have heard so many stories of contractors, and I've met some too, who worked for him, produced the goods and services, and never got paid for what they were owed. I'm talking about painters, and plumbers, piano sellers, architects, glass installers ... he stiffed them all. Not because he couldn't pay them, but he wouldn't pay them. And he told them, 'You want to get your money? Sue me.' My dad could never have done that. I'm just grateful my dad never got a contract with Donald Trump, because I don't know what we would have done. More than 60 percent of small businesses face payment delays. That can cause a serious cash flow crisis. So as president, I will explore new ways to arm small businesses with the tools to fight back and level the playing field. Part of the problem is large corporations are amassing so much power in our economy. Sometimes it's called market concentration or even old-fashioned monopolies, but either way it threatens businesses of all sizes, as well as consumers. With less competition, corporations can use their power to raise prices, limit choice for consumers, cut wages for workers, crowd out startups and small businesses. I mean, look what's happening right now. In most of the country, the three largest health insurance companies in each state control 80 percent of the market. No wonder premiums are going up. As president, I will appoint tough, independent authorities to strengthen anti-trust enforcement and really scrutinize mergers and acquisitions, so the big don't keep getting bigger and bigger. I want every business to compete and thrive, and then I also want to do something else. Let's protect and empower workers who actually drive our economy. Everyone who works hard should be able to share in the rewards, not just senior executives. So we're proposing new tax credits to encourage more companies to share profits, on top of, not instead of, higher wages. We need to support new organizing strategies for employees who too often have never had the benefit of collective bargaining. And we have to resist the assault on workers' rights. Let's say loudly and clearly: 'right to work' is wrong for workers and wrong for America. Let's also, my friends, let's raise the minimum wage and support the Fight for 15 so you don't live in poverty. Let's defend overtime and go after wage theft. Let's provide family leave that is paid and access to affordable, high-quality childcare. And of course you know what I'm going to say: let's finally guarantee equal pay for women. Now, my opponent and his chief surrogates like to say I'm playing the woman's card. And I'll tell you ... right? ... if fighting for working families is playing the women's card, you know what? Deal me in! And then finally, I've got a lot on my mind, but finally, we need to make it easier for companies to invest in good jobs here at home. As president, I will ramp up enforcement of trade rules by appointing a new chief trade prosecutor and tripling the number of enforcement officers. We will work with both parties to pass the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II. I want to direct $10 billion to create a 'Make It in America' partnership to support American manufacturing. And I want to take some of the ideas that worked when my husband was President and we ended up with 23 million new jobs and incomes went up for everybody. That includes incentives like the New Markets Tax Credit for creating good jobs in poor or remote areas, from inner cities to rural communities ravaged ... ravaged ... by hollowed-out factories, ravaged by mines that have been shut down, ravaged by opiate addiction. It all comes down to this: When I say our economy should work for everyone, not just those at the top, I mean it. And we're going to do everything we can to make sure workers are treated like assets, not costs. And we're going to bring back infrastructure jobs, advanced manufacturing jobs, clean, renewable energy jobs, innovation, technology, small business.  Now, you don't have to look any further than right here in Northwest Ohio. Just a few years ago, as you heard Kenyetta say, in 2009 you were in the eye of the storm. Jobs, homes, savings, wiped out. The auto industry on the verge of collapse. A lot of people were ready to give up on it. Well, that would have meant giving up on 850,000 people across this state whose jobs were tied to the industry. Donald Trump, for one, said rescuing the auto industry didn't matter very much. Either way would have been acceptable, he said. 'We could have just let it go,' and that's a direct quote from him. Everybody in Ohio who's thinking about voting for Trump needs to hear that. At the time of the worst financial crisis in Ohio in 2009, he would have let you twist and fall. And for his running mate he picked Mike Pence, an ardent opponent of the auto rescue. Well, thank goodness the people of Northwest Ohio weren't ready to let it go. You never gave up. You didn't lose faith. And now, after a lot of hard work and sacrifice, the auto industry just had its best year ever. But that's not all there is to the story because in addition to that hard work, America, America, came to the rescue. Taxpayers like all of us, not him but us, provided the funds for the rescue. Union workers stepped up. Communities like Toledo came together to make it work. And now that the industry's back on its feet, the auto companies have a responsibility to give back.  So I was delighted to hear that Chrysler is doubling down on Toledo, investing $700 million here to start building the next generation Jeep Wrangler, which could create about 700 new good jobs. And tens of thousands of UAW workers at Chrysler plants should see a big increase in profit-sharing payments above and beyond wages and benefits. Now, that's the way it's supposed to work, when we all help each other out. When we stand together, we are stronger together. So what I want you to know is if you join me in this campaign, I will always stand up and fight for you and fight for your jobs and fight for your families. And I guess we have about 36 days left. The election's going to be close. Every call you make, every door you knock, every friend you register to vote, could make the difference. You can text 'join,' j-o-i-n, to 47246 right now or go to hillaryclinton.com to sign up and volunteer. Here in Ohio you have until October the 11th to register to vote. And there are people with clipboards around, and you can go actually register today on your way out the door. So we have just over a week to register, and then early voting starts October 12th. Let's prove ... let's prove ... that the American dream is big enough for everyone to share in its promise. Let's prove that we're going to stand together, make the smart decisions that we get the economy going and growing for everybody, not just those at the top; that we will stand up against special privilege and special interest; that we will be ready after this election to have an agenda that will really make a difference here in Toledo and across Ohio. So I'm here asking for your help, asking for your work, asking for you to be part of this campaign, and then when we win on November 8, be part of changing our country for the better! Thank you all and God bless you!" Any of you see that debate last night? I'll tell you what, I'm not sure you'll ever see anything like that again. At least I hope you won't. It was such a clear display of what's at stake in this election. And I am thrilled to have the chance to talk with all of you about what we can do together, because I truly believe we are stronger together. To move our country forward. Now, the one thing I thought about last night and said was, as I was standing there on the stage with my opponent, was to remember what Michelle Obama had said. To paraphrase her, one of us went low and one of us went high. I want you to understand, I want to be a president for all Americans. I think the American dream is big enough for everybody. And I am honored to have support, not just from Democrats, but from independents and Republicans, because we've got to pull this country together if we're going to move into the future together, creating what we need for ourselves and our children. Now, I got to tell you, tomorrow is a big day in Ohio for this election because tomorrow, October 11th, is the last day to register in Ohio. And I hope every one of you will take your phones out, go to iwillvote.com, to confirm that you are registered. Because we want everybody to vote and we particularly want young people to vote because this is your election more than anybody else's. When I think about the challenges that we're facing, I don't think any one person has all the answers. I think we have to listen to each other and respect each other and celebrate our diversity, because that makes us smarter as well as stronger. Donald Trump spent his time last night attacking me when he should have been apologizing. We all heard on that tape what he thinks of women and how he treats women. And last night he doubled down on his excuse, saying that, well, it's just locker room banter. You know what's happened today, which is so interesting, is that a lot of athletes and coaches from the NBA, from Major League Baseball, from the NFL and more, have been coming forward, tweeting, they've been saying, no, that's not what happens in our locker rooms. And I just happen to think that our athletes and our coaches know a lot more about what happens in locker rooms than Donald Trump does. But it wasn't just this one video that was so disturbing, even shocking. We have seen this kind of behavior throughout this entire campaign, and it's not just about women. Yes, he's insulted and demeaned women; we've seen it over and over again. But he has targeted others as well. He's disrespected and denigrated African Americans and Latinos, Muslims and POWs, people with disabilities and immigrants. He is an equal-opportunity insulter if there ever was one. That is not what we are in America. And it may be who he is, but this election is our chance to show who we are. We are better than that. We are bigger than that. And I want to send a message to every boy and girl, every man and woman in our country, indeed, to the entire world, that that is not who America is. And we can do that by making sure that we turn out in the biggest numbers ever. Some analysts are saying we may have the biggest presidential election than we've had in a really long time. And the main reason is because your generation, the young people of America, are the most tolerant, open and generous generation in American history.  You know what's at stake, but you also know what you believe. And you don't want someone who says that he's going to appoint Supreme Court justices who will reverse marriage equality; who will ... who will keep Citizens United, one of the worst decisions ever made, that allowed dark, unaccountable money in our electoral system; that will reverse a woman's right to make her own health care decisions; who will defund Planned Parenthood. You know better than that. You are helping us move toward a more perfect union. That has been the story of America at our best. We keep widening the circle of opportunity and inviting more people in. If you're willing to do your part, you're willing to make your contribution, there is a place for you in this nation of ours. We don't have to make America great. We've got to do what we can to make sure it remains great and it becomes greater because we keep broadening that circle of opportunity. And please, never forget America is great because America is good, and if we deviate, if we deviate from our fundamental values ... and that's indeed the kind of campaign my opponent has run. He has said he would order our men and women in uniform to commit war crimes. He has said he would impose a religious test on who could come into our country ... a nation founded on religious freedom and liberty. This is turning the clock back, not just a few years, but centuries. The only way to rebuke this is to vote. Use the single most important, fundamental right you have as citizens of America. And when you do, I want you to know what you're voting for, because I don't want you just to vote against something. I want you to vote for something. And here's what we're going to do. I believe our economy should work for everyone, not just those at the top. So I am ending this campaign the way I started my career all those years ago when I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund. As soon as I got out of law school, I said, I don't want to do anything else other than work hard and advocate for kids and families. So I was fortunate to have the chance to be really on the front lines of a lot of change, helping to get the law that enabled people, kids with disabilities, to go to school. Now, most of you may not have any reason to remember this because you weren't born, but ... there was a time in our country not so long ago when if you had a disability, if you lived in a school district, there was no requirement that they make accommodations for you. And literally millions of kids were denied an education. I went door to door getting information about what was going on with these children so that I could contribute a report to a big national effort to go to the Congress and say, this is wrong ... in America, we're better than this. Open the doors of our schools to kids with disabilities. And then I was privileged to work to make sure that we got young people out of adult jails and prisons where they had no reason to be in the first place.  So when Donald Trump talks about what I've been doing for the last 30 years, I welcome that. I welcome it because in the 1970s, I was working to end discrimination and he was being sued by the Justice Department for racial discrimination against people in his apartments. And in the 1980s, I was working to improve the schools in Arkansas to make sure that teachers were well paid and that the coursework was going to prepare kids for the future, while he was getting a loan for $14 million from his father to start a business. And in the 1990s, I went to the UN Conference on Women and said women's rights are human rights ... while he was insulting Miss Universe, Alicia Machado. And on the day ... on the day that I was in the Situation Room watching the raid that brought Osama bin Laden to justice, he was hosting Celebrity Apprentice. So if he wants to talk about what we have been doing the last 30 years, bring it on.  So we've got to make up our minds about what kind of economy we want. And I'm pretty clear about that. I think we want new jobs with rising incomes. And I want us to have the biggest new jobs effort since the end of World War II. And I have some specific ideas in mind. We are going to have a big investment in infrastructure: our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports, our airports, our water systems. They need to be upgraded and maintained and built. That is a question of competitiveness. We have to have a competitive economy. Our airports are so rundown we don't even have one airport in our entire country in the top 25 in the world because we're not using the newest technology. We're not really prepared to do what we need to to invest in you and invest in those new jobs. I do want to bring advanced manufacturing. I heard Ted Strickland talking about that. I think we can have a manufacturing renaissance. There is no reason that we cannot own new manufacturing. I'm not interested in a race to the bottom, in competing for low-wage jobs. I am interested in competing for the high-wage jobs. So let's lead in precision machining, 3D printing.  And let's be the clean energy superpower of the 21st century. Some nation's going to have that title. I think it's either going to be Germany or China or us. It should be us. No question it should be. We're going to fight climate change. And we're going to lead the world in fulfilling the requirements of the Paris agreement. I'm running against somebody who doesn't believe in climate change or at least he says he doesn't , who has even said he thinks it's a hoax created by the Chinese. Well, right now the Chinese have twice as much renewable energy as we do. So maybe they think it's a hoax, but they're investing. And they're creating. And they're going to want to export. And what a shame it would be. We have innovated. We have made the technology that could bring us into the forefront of this. And we're going to do it. When I am president, I want all of you who care about science, technology, engineering, mathematics, I want you to be part of it. And while we are growing the economy, we are going to make it fairer. We are going to raise the national minimum wage because no one who works full-time should be left in poverty. And don't you think it is finally time to guarantee equal pay for women's work?  You know, back in the spring, I was at a town hall in Las Vegas. And the little girl raised her hand. And I called on her. And she said to me, 'If you're elected president, does a girl president make the same as a boy president?' I said, "Well, that's one of those jobs where they have to publish what you make." So we're going to have more transparency so people have more incentive to make sure that everybody is treated fairly. And I'll tell you something else. I want to do more to promote profit-sharing. If you help to make the profits, it shouldn't all just go to the executives and the shareholders. You should be able to share in that. Now, there's a lot we can do. And people say, 'Well, how are you going to pay for it?' Well, I'm going to go where the money is. And all the money is going to the wealthiest in our country. I have made a pledge, and you can hold me to it. I will not raise taxes on the middle class. Nobody who is working hard to get ahead should be asked to pay more in taxes when we have so many people who have done so well and are not paying their fair share. Now, Donald Trump is the poster child for this. Last night he finally admitted he hasn't paid a dime in federal income tax for years. Now, he claims that's because back in the early 1990s, he apparently lost a billion dollars running casinos. Who loses money running casinos? Really. Now, one of his supporters said, 'Well, the fact that he lost a billion dollars and that meant he didn't have to pay taxes made him a genius.' Well, I guess you do have to be a genius to lose a billion dollars in a year. But I'll tell you what. What that meant was he paid zero, zero for the military, zero for our vets, zero for Pell Grants to help a lot of you afford college and get through college. And then he did something that, in retrospect, seemed both odd and not very smart. He brought in Warren Buffett. He said, 'Well, everybody does this. Warren Buffett does this.' So Warren Buffett, who, by the way, is a real billionaire, Warren Buffett, heard that, pretty hard to miss. And so he put out a statement today. And here's what he said. He said, 'I have paid federal income tax every year since 1944, when I was 13.' He said, 'I have copies of all 72 of my returns. And none uses a carryforward.' That was the gimmick Trump used to avoid paying his fair share. And then Warren Buffett ends by saying, 'Finally, I have been audited by the IRS multiple times and am currently being audited. I have no problem releasing my tax information while under audit.' 'Neither would Mr. Trump. At least he would have no legal problem in doing so.' Well, if you take a shot at Warren Buffett, you'd better be prepared.  And in fact, Warren Buffett actually agrees with me that wealthy people ought to pay more. He says no person in his fortunate position in life should be paying a lower tax rate than people who work for him. And he has proposed what's called the Buffett rule, and I am absolutely behind that, and I've said that's one of the changes I want ... so that the wealthy have to pay their fair share. Now, there was a lot about last night that was hard to believe. And so, don't. But one of the things that really struck me was he had not answer. You know, he's not usually tongue-tied, but he had no answer when confronted about the report that he's been buying cheap Chinese steel for his construction projects instead of American-made steel that supports good American jobs. Now, I know you've seen reports and you've probably seen a lot of the visuals coming out of his rallies. He's had a lot of them across Ohio. He claims to be on the side of workers. He especially likes to talk about how he supports American steelworkers. He even had the nerve ... this is what kills me about him ... he even had the nerve to brag about how American steel will send new skyscrapers soaring. And the whole time he was hiding the truth. Hiding the fact that he chose to buy illegally-dumped Chinese steel instead of American steel.  You know, when China illegally floods our market with steel at below-price, and people like Trump buy it, that kills jobs. It kills jobs in this state, including right here in Columbus. This May, Columbus Castings, the biggest single-site foundry in America, just seven miles from where we are tonight, filed for bankruptcy and announced that 800 workers would be laid off. Now, when I think of that and I think of the way Trump has been playing people, it really ... it really gets me upset. There's no justification for it. But it fits him to a T. For all his talk about putting America first, he's made his products in at least 12 other countries. Trump's suits and ties were made in Mexico and China. They could have been made right here in Ohio. In fact, he could have made his ties three miles from the Trump Tower in New York. So we've got to figure out how we have an economy that really does produce growth and rewards companies that do the right thing. And that for me means we need to have a tax system that rewards investment in our country, investment in workers, investment in plant and equipment, investment in research and development, and give the good guys a chance to get ahead instead of being taken advantage of by Wall Street and others.  We are going to end the cowboy culture on Wall Street and what happens in too many boardrooms. We're going to defend the tough new rules on Wall Street that President Obama got passed, the Dodd-Frank rules. Trump wants to do away with those. He also wants to do away with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, something that was designed and created by my friend Senator Elizabeth Warren to protect consumers. He wants to do away with that. And yet he claims to be on the side of working people and the middle class. Well, we're going to crack down on corporate fraud, like we've seen at Wells Fargo. We're going to crack down to make sure that Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again. And we're going to do it in part by imposing some penalties on companies that try to pick up and leave America. If they try to leave, we're going to slap an exit tax on them and make them pay back every single penny they ever got in tax benefits from anybody in America. We're also going to end the carried interest loophole. I've been trying to get that done for years. We're going to get it done. We've got a couple of different ways of doing it. I hope that Congress along with us, but if they don't, we're going to figure out a way to finally put an end to what is one of the most unfair parts of the whole tax code, hedge fund managers and others paying a lower tax rate, not for investing but just for moving money around. That's going to end. I want to reward the productive economy. I don't want to keep rewarding the financial economy. That is not the way we're going to grow new businesses, and create new opportunities and more jobs for Americans. Now, people in Ohio often ask about, 'Well, what are we going to do about trade?' Well, we're going to have smart and fair trade. That's what I love about your Senator, Sherrod Brown. He is one of the best advocates for the kind of trade deals we should have. Look. We've got to trade with the rest of the world. We're only 5 percent of the population of the world. We've got to trade with the other 95 percent. When I was Secretary of State, we really bore down on this, and we increased American exports 30 percent, and in particular, 50 percent to China, because we stood behind every American business. We helped them knock down every barrier so that they could get into those markets and sell. And I've gone toe-to-toe with the Chinese over trade. They have tried to slap unfair tariffs and prevent American companies from doing business without having to pay some kind of big fine or make some big deal. So we're going to stand up. I'm going to have a trade prosecutor who will report directly to me to make sure every trade deal we're already in is absolutely followed to the letter so nobody takes advantage of us. And I've always had three tests for trade deals: Does it create American jobs? Does it raise American incomes? is it good for our national security? And when it comes to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the TPP, it fails my tests. Once it was finally negotiated, I don't think it will do what I want it to do, so I oppose it. I oppose TPP now. I'll oppose it after the election. I'll oppose it as president. But I'm going to keep fighting to open markets so that we can get more jobs and rising incomes by exporting into those markets and doing business with the rest of the world.  I also saw a sign or a t-shirt out here about Social Security. And that may not always be something that people on a great university campus think about, but I'll tell you what. I am never going to let anybody privatize Social Security. That is off the table forever. So let's say yes to good jobs, but here's what else we need to say yes to. Let's say yes to good education from preschool all the way through college and university. I want every kid to be able to attend this great university to do well. And for a lot of kids, they're not prepared when they get to kindergarten and first grade. There's an achievement gap already. There's also a digital gap; we have five million homes, mostly poor homes, without access to the internet, so they're behind. I want this to be a true meritocracy. I'm tired of inequality. I want people to feel like they can get ahead if they work for it.  So I want to have universal pre-kindergarten so every child can be prepared to be successful. I want good schools and good teachers in every zip code so every child has the best possible public education. And I think we made a mistake when we took what used to be called vocational education out of high school. We need technical education for more young people. Not everybody needs to or wants to go to a four-year college, but everybody should have the opportunity to get the skills that he or she needs to get ahead and be successful. I want us to have our community colleges working with our high schools and our businesses. We have a lot of job openings for machinists and tool and die markers, for coders, for all kinds of skills. And then when it comes to college, I want everybody who goes to a public college or university to understand what I am proposing that is a joint proposal from Senator Sanders and myself. We both remember that college was affordable. And it isn't for a lot of people now, and a lot of states have disinvested in their great public colleges and universities. So here is our proposal. We want anyone from a family that makes less than $125,000 a year to go to Ohio State University tuition-free. And for families over that line, we want you to go debt-free. So yes, you pay what you can afford, but you don't have to go into debt to go to Ohio State. And I'll tell you, the other big problem ... how many of you already have student debt? Oh, wow. Practically every hand. Well, here's what we're going to do. We're going to make it possible for you to refinance that debt. If you can refinance your home mortgage, your car payment, or if Donald can refinance his airplane, you ought to be able to refinance your student debt.  And then we want you to pay it back as a percentage of the income you make, and have a limit on that, 10 percent, so that ... I feel personally about this because that's what I did after law school. My dad was a small businessman, and he really was a saver. He didn't even have a credit card. Didn't believe in that. So he saved the money for me to go to college. I had to work if I wanted to buy a book, but that was okay. That was the arrangement. And then I told him I wanted to go to law school. He said, 'You're on your own. I don't have any money for that.' So I worked, I got a small scholarship, and I took out loans. But boy, was I lucky, because I got into one of the earliest income repayment programs. In other words, when I got out of law school, I could go to work for the Children's Defense Fund and make, I don't know, $14,000 a year because I could pay it back as a percentage of my income, not on an interest rate of 8, 10, 12 percent like I see from young people across America. So that's what I want, but I also want to make it possible, if you do public service or national service, to have a lot of your loan, and maybe all of it, forgiven because you're going to be paying back to our country. And I've got this idea about something I'm calling the National Service Reserve. It's kind of like if any of you have ever been in the military reserve. You get the training and you're kind of on call and you practice and train. And then if you're needed, you're called up. I want a civilian national reserve, and I want people of all ages in it. And we would train you so that if there's a natural disaster or some other problem that has to be dealt with, we could call you up to go do that. And it's a way of making sure that people are giving back all the time to this country because that's how we build solidarity. That's how we get to know each other better.  So I'm pretty excited about what we're going to do together. And I can't do any of this without your help. I really am asking you to do everything you can to make sure you're registered, to tell your friends and anybody else you can talk to make sure they're registered. As I said, go to iwillvote.com. You can find it out right there on that site. And we'd love to have you be involved in the campaign because I know that if we win in November, we can summon the positive spirit of our country back again. I think I have to do everything, everything in my power to bring people together, and I will. It's really important to me that you know that I want to be your president whether you vote for me or not. Obviously, I hope you do, but I will be your president, and I will stand up for you, and I will work for you, and I will fight for you. So please, if you're not registered, get registered by tomorrow, and then you can start voting October 12th. And whatever issue, whatever issue you care about, imagine that that is on the ballot. Imagine if you believe the minimum wage should be a living wage, if you believe ... if you believe that we finally should have paid family leave in this country like every other advanced economy, if you believe climate change is real and we could save our planet by creating a lot of jobs at the same time, if you believe diversity is America's strength, not a weakness, if you believe women should be able to make our own health care decisions and that LGBT Americans should be treated equally across America, and you should be able to live up to your potential, no matter who you are or where you come from, then start voting October the 12th! And I promise you this. Together we're going to prove that we can make the future what it should be for all of you; that there is a positive, optimistic, confident America out there; that America's best days are ahead of us, not the dark and divisive vision of my opponent, but one in keeping with what I see as I travel across America ... the energy, the dynamism, the entrepreneurial spirit of all Americans, but particularly young Americans. So please, join this campaign. Be part of it for the next 29 days. And together we will prove that we can have the future that we want and that yes, love trumps hate! Thank you, Ohio State!" And I want to thank everyone for gathering and in particular, I want to thank all of the elected officials. Thanks to Congressman Patrick Murphy who I hope is the next senator from Florida. Thanks to Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz. Thank you to Mayor Phillip Levine of Miami Beach. Thanks to Mayor Phillip Stoddard of South Miami. Thanks to all the others who were part of the program. As we were coming in, we heard lots of energy coming from this crowd, and I was told as I was coming out, there's an overflow, but they can hear us in the overflow, and we're so happy you're here as well! So thanks to the overflow crowd. But what I am most excited about is to be here with one of the world's most foremost leaders on climate change: Al Gore. About a decade ago, Al made a movie called 'An Inconvenient Truth.' Now, maybe some of you have seen it, but if you haven't, I hope you'll watch it tonight. It doesn't have a lot of special effects ... but it does have a lot of drama. And here's the main message: climate change is real, it's urgent, and America can take the lead in the world in addressing it. Right? We here in America can develop new clean energy solutions. We can transform our economy. We can rally the world to cut carbon pollution. And above all, we can fulfill our moral obligation to protect our planet for our children and our grandchildren. Now, let me just say ... so, so let's remember, let's remember what's at stake. I'm running against a guy who denies science, denies climate change, claims it's a hoax created by the Chinese. So this is something that Al Gore's been working on for a really long time. And I want you to know how far back he goes. It was in 1982 when he held the very first hearing on climate change in the House of Representatives with the world-famous climate scientist Jim Hansen. And then when Al became a senator, he continued to raise the alarm and look for solutions, and as vice president, he led America's efforts to negotiate the Kyoto Protocol to cut greenhouse gas emissions. You take all this together, those 30 years of leadership led Al Gore to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2007. I was very proud because he had been determined and persistent, and in the face of a lot of people ... in public life, in business, in elsewhere who were trying to diminish the importance of the science ... he never wavered. And in the years since, the climate challenge has only grown more stark. And I will tell you this, it is one of the most important issues at stake in this election. Look at it this way. Our next president will either step up our efforts to address climate change, to protect our planet, to protect our health, and to create good jobs that cannot be outsourced by growing our clean energy economy. Or in the alternative, we will be dragged backwards and our whole future will be put at risk. So we've really got to get this right. And if you need additional convincing, just remember what happened this week. Hurricane Matthew killed at least 26 people in our country, more than a thousand as far as we know right now in Haiti. North Carolina is still dealing with serious flooding and will be at least for the rest of the week, if not longer. We all need to support each other as our communities put the pieces back together and begin the long road back from this disaster. That's why I've encouraged everyone to give what you can afford to the Florida Disaster Fund or to Team Rubicon, the veterans organization working to respond to Hurricane Matthew, or to UNICEF, helping children and families on the ground in Haiti. Now, some will say, 'We've always had hurricanes. They've always been destructive.' And that's true. But Hurricane Matthew was likely more destructive because of climate change. Right now, the ocean is at or near record-high temperatures ... and that contributed to the torrential rainfall and the flash flooding that we saw in the Carolinas. Sea levels have already risen about a foot ... one foot ... in much of the Southeast, which means that Matthew's storm surge was higher and the flooding was more severe. Plus, as you know, the impact of climate change goes beyond extreme events like hurricanes. It's become a daily reality here in Miami. You have streets in Miami Beach and in Shorecrest that are flooding at high tide. The ocean is bubbling up through the sewer system. Sometimes, people call 311 because they assume a water main must have broken when actually it is the sea rising around them. So, if you need proof that climate change is real and that it's costly, there you go. So at this rate, at this rate, my friends, my friends, please. Let's focus on what's really important in this election and in your future and the future of our country, because this is what I want you to hear and understand. At the rate we are going, one in eight homes in Florida could be underwater by the end of the century, and when kids ... like that adorable young boy over there on his dad's shoulders ... are grandparents, we believe that's more than $400 billion worth of property in Florida at risk, and nationwide, it's as much as $882 billion in property at risk. But there's also health consequences. Mosquitoes that carry diseases like the Zika virus and ticks that carry Lyme disease are expanding their ranges. And hotter summers and longer pollen seasons are making allergies and asthma worse, which is especially bad for our children. And look at what is happening in California, a brutal five-year drought. Wildfires have burned more than 9 million acres in our country last year. And it's also about national security. The Pentagon has identified climate change as a threat to our America's national security. The U.S. Atlantic Fleet is based in Norfolk, Virginia. It's the largest naval installation in the world. And because of rising sea level, the base is frequently flooded, even when it's sunny. So that's why the Pentagon is looking at how climate change will affect readiness and operations, not just in Norfolk, but at all of our military bases around the world. So you would think if you look at the facts, if you listen to the science, that even the most committed climate skeptic would say, 'Ok, I agree, something's happening here. We need to take it seriously.' But unfortunately, there are still plenty of people ... in Washington, on the campaign trail ... who won't face what's happening right in front of us. Donald Trump, is, quote, 'not a big believer' in climate change. As I said, he said it's a hoax created by the Chinese. And in our first debate two weeks ago, he tried to deny saying that. But that tweet is still there for everyone to see. And I would wish that Donald would actually listen to people here in Florida, like Miami Beach's Mayor Philip Levine and others who are doing incredible work to address these 'Sunny Day' Floods. Or maybe, he would listen to Miami Beach Commissioner John Elizabeth Alem..n. Or maybe he would listen to Miami Beach Commissioner, John Elizabeth Alem..n. John Elizabeth is a Republican, but she's supporting our campaign...because she knows America can't afford a candidate who doesn't accept climate science. Or maybe Donald would listen to our military leaders who say climate change threatens our national security, or what about the ranchers in Colorado, or the mayors in Arizona or the community leaders in Alaska who say, 'Our lives and jobs and families are being affected ... please, let's come together as a country and do something about it.' We cannot risk putting a climate denier in the White House. At all, that is absolutely unacceptable. We need a president who believes in science and who has a plan to lead America in facing this threat, creating good jobs, and yes, saving our planet. So here's what I want to do. First, we need to do a lot more on clean energy. The clean energy superpower of the 21st century is probably going to be either Germany, China, or us...and I want it to be us. And I want you to be part of making it us. And we need to accelerate the transition to a clean energy economy and create high paying jobs, building and installing more solar panels and wind turbines. Modernizing our electric grid. Retrofitting buildings. Building resilient, 21st century infrastructure, and we have to make sure no community is left out or left behind...not our cities or our small towns or our remote, rural areas. Now, you wouldn't know it if you only listened to my opponent talk about how terrible everything is. He has such a dark, divisive view of America, but that doesn't tell the story about what's really going on. It's actually pretty exciting. In red states and blue states, local leaders are stepping up. Rural electric co-ops are investing in community solar power and you see that across America ... union workers in Michigan, union workers in Michigan are getting ready to build electric Chevys in a plant powered by clean energy. Iowa, Iowa is already getting a third of its electricity from wind. Wind turbines are going up in New England and on Lake Erie. Renewable energy is already the fastest-growing source of new jobs in America. I think that is so exciting ... there are nearly 2 million people already working in energy efficiency. And in Spartanburg, South Carolina, a project called ReGenesis is taking an old landfill and turning it into a solar farm. That landfill was a blight and a health threat, just 250 feet away from a residential neighborhood. Now, that same land will generate enough clean, renewable electricity to power 500 homes. So this is what we can do. And I think Washington should back up and support doing more of that. As president, I want us to have 500 million solar panels installed across America by the end of my first term. And let's generate enough renewable energy to power every home in America within the decade. Let's make our buildings and factories more energy efficient and cut our oil consumption by one-third. And we can get there by investing in cutting edge research, to keep developing cheaper and better clean energy technologies, investing in clean energy infrastructure and advanced manufacturing, putting big partnerships together between states, cities, and rural communities. We can do all of this and create millions of good-paying jobs as we do. So I'm hoping that these good jobs will offer security and dignity while we produce the clean energy that will power the economy of the future. The clean energy solutions are being developed right here in America. We want them manufactured in America, installed in America, and putting people to work in America. And while we do that, let's make sure our communities are ready for the impacts of climate change that are coming right at us. We need to invest in resilient infrastructure. Now, sometimes that will mean building a seawall; other times, let's be more creative ... like in New York Harbor, where we are replanting oyster beds to form natural barriers to storm surge. Sometimes we'll overhaul an outdated sewer system to deal with flooding from heavy downpours. In Philadelphia, they're trying something else: green roofs, porous pavements, curbside gardens to help absorb storm water. And here's something we don't talk enough about. Let's make sure our hospitals can stay open and operational in any kind of disaster. Because sadly, I saw what happened in New York during Hurricane Sandy, newborns who had been on respirators had to be evacuated down nine flights of stairs in one New York hospital, because the electricity went off. Nurses, I love nurses ... heroic, courageous nurses were carrying those babies and manually squeezing bags of air to keep them breathing. Now, here in Miami, you know how important this is. You have retrofitted the Nicklaus Children's Hospital with a hurricane-resistant shell for exactly this reason. And every hospital in the country should follow your lead and build in more resilience. And then finally, we have got to lead the world to confront the climate challenge. If we don't do it, nobody will do it. We must confront the climate challenge. There's no doubt about that. And so, let's move on with the kind of leadership that the world as well as our country deserves. When I was Secretary of State, I worked with President Obama to make climate change a top diplomatic priority. We fought to get China and India and other major polluters to agree for the first time in history to be part of the solution. In fact, we had to crash a secret meeting in Copenhagen, Denmark ... slip past the guards ... it was all very cloak and dagger. But for a really important purpose, and because of that breakthrough, and a lot of patient, persistent work, and because of American leadership, 195 nations signed on to a global agreement last December. It's called the Paris Agreement. And I am not exaggerating when I say it is our last, best chance to solve the global, climate crisis. And what does Donald Trump want to do? He wants to cancel the Paris Agreement. He doesn't care what it would do to the planet. He doesn't care how much that would damage American leadership in the world. He doesn't care what it would do to the future we leave our kids and our grandkids. Well, he may not care ... but we do. And that's why this election is so critically important because on the ballot, it is not just my name. It's every issue we care about it's our values as a country. Climate change needs to be a voting issue. We need to elect people up and down the ballot, at every level of government, who take it seriously and are willing to roll up their sleeves and get something done. Please, we cannot keep sending climate deniers and defeatists to Congress or to state houses...and certainly not to the White House. And if you care about climate, your Senate race is also really important, and I'll tell you why. It is unacceptable, it is an unacceptable response for Marco Rubio, when asked about climate change to say, 'I'm not a scientist.' Well, why doesn't he ask a scientist and then maybe then he'd understand why it is so important that he, representing Florida, be committed to climate change? That's why I hope that you'll elect Patrick Murphy to the United States Senate. Look, we need leaders who can get results. It's easy to stonewall. It's not enough to protest: we need creativity, we need hard work. And when it comes to climate change, we don't have a minute to waste. So, I know it's easy to get cynical...especially about our politics. I get that. But this election matters more than any has in a really long time, and I believe that as strongly as I can, we've got to address this issue for our sakes, our children, our grandchildren. And it's so critically important when you think about how leadership can make a difference. And just look, if you will ... look at the difference between your state, the Sunshine State, which has less solar energy than New Jersey has right now. And do you know why? Because you have a governor who has ordered the state government never to use the words 'climate change.' So my friends, this is a big deal in the election, and it is going to be a big deal for our country and our world. And there isn't anybody ... there isn't anybody who knows more, has done more, has worked harder. I know he was in Miami just last year, training and educating people to be climate change activists. I can't wait to have Al Gore advising me when I am President of the United States. So please join me in welcoming our former vice president, a climate change leader and an all-around great guy, Al Gore."  Hillary! Hillary! Thank you so very, very much. Wow. I am so happy to be back here and to be here with all of you. I am thrilled. And I can't thank you enough. And it's a special privilege and pleasure to be introduced by my friend and such a great leader, someone who has served not only this state so well, but also our country. And so I want to thank -- once again, I want to thank former senator and former secretary, Ken Salazar.  And I also want to thank somebody else who's here who is really special and is doing such a great job for all of you. And that is your senator, and I hope you will get out and send him back to Washington, Michael Bennet. I also want to recognize someone who's running a great race for congress, Gail Schwartz. I -- I was thinking -- I was thinking, the first time I came to this beautiful place and had a chance to meet people from here was in 1992. I was here for somebody else, namely my husband who was running for president. And I know there are a lot of really young people here, but was anybody here back in 1992? Well, Bill and I talk about Pueblo all the time. And it is always a treat for either one of us to come. And today, it's especially important because we are getting closer and closer and closer to the next election. And we're also very conscious of the fact that here in Colorado for the first time, you are all going to be able to vote by mail. And this Monday, October 17th, ballots will start being mailed to Colorado voters. Now, if you've already registered to vote, I hope you'll keep your eye open for the mail and fill out your ballot. Send it back as quick as you can. Don't wait to fill it out. Don't do what I do, put it on the kitchen counter and then you put something else on top of it and something else and pretty soon you're wondering, "Where is that ballot? I know it cam here a few days ago." So please put it in the mail so we can get every early vote counted quickly and avoid a big backlog on election night. And maybe -- if you haven't registered to vote yet, please do it right now. And if you go to Iwillvote.com, you can do that on your phones -- you do that right now -- you can get registered. Pretty easy, huh? Because we need everybody to vote in this election. And we need your friends and your family and everyone you can reach, because this is about something so important. I don't know that there's ever been a more serious or consequential election. And we can see that people feel that way, because across America, people are already voting in high numbers. A lot of states have what's called early vote, and the numbers are bigger than anybody thought. And bigger than they've been in the past. Just this morning in Ohio, people began lining up last night so they could be sure to vote. They couldn't wait to cast their ballots. And by the time we're done, we expect record numbers of people to vote in this presidential election. So don't be left out because we need you. And oh by the way, if you've got friends in Utah or Arizona make sure they vote too. We are competing everywhere and the polls are tightening because I think Americans want to turn out as big a number as possible to reject the dark and divisive and hateful campaign that is being run by my opponent. And you know, your vote can make all the difference. I was in Florida yesterday with former Vice President Gore. And as he said yesterday, take it from him, every vote counts. So don't sit this one out. And I'm very proud of the campaign we've run. I'm proud of the campaign Bernie Sanders and I ran. It was about -- it was about issues, not insults. We were setting forth a positive agenda that would help America. And help millions and millions of Americans get ahead and stay ahead. And to me, that is what we're supposed to be doing. We're supposed to bring people together. We're supposed to unify our country. We're supposed to solve our problems by working together. And I know it's been a long race, but as soon as our primary finished, Senator Sanders and I got together and came up with a plan to make college affordable and pay back student debt, provide more healthcare. And we have done our best to stay out of all the meanness. You know, the other night -- did you see that last debate? Well, I was watching my opponent just go lower and lower and lower. And I was reminded of what my friend, and our first lady, Michelle Obama says. When they go low, we go high. And I want you to know I want to be -- I want to be the president for everyone. I am tired of the all the divisions and the barriers. I want to bring people together across our party lines, across any lines that divide us. And not just people who vote for me, I want to be the president, yes, for Democrats, but also Republicans and Independents. And I am very grateful for all of the Republicans who are supporting me. And I am very -- I'm very appreciative of all of the newspapers that are endorsing me, some of whom have never endorsed a Democrat before. So we're going to keep running this campaign. I want to give you something to vote for, not just something to vote against. And during these next 28 days, we're going to crisscross our country. We're going to be talking about what we can do together. But Donald Trump is taking a very different tone. His campaign -- his campaign said today that they're going to use a, quote, "scorched Earth" strategy for the remaining four weeks of this race. Now, that just shows how desperate they are. That's all they have left, pure negativity, pessimism. And we're not going to let Donald Trump get away with it, are we? I don't care what he says about me. I -- I -- I care about what he says about you. And I'll tell you what, I will stand up and defend every single person in this country from the insults and the disrespect that we hear from him. Now, the whole world has heard how Donald Trump treats women and what he thinks of women. And he is doubling-down on his excuse that it's just, quote, "locker room talk." Well, you know what happened? It just kind of happened spontaneously. A lot of athletes and coaches started posting on Twitter and Instagram and Facebook. I mean, the National Basketball Association, Major League Baseball, the NFL, and more. They are coming together and they're saying, "That doesn't happen in our locker rooms." But of course, you know, it's not only women that he has disrespected. He's insulted practically everybody. He went after a distinguished federal judge, Judge Curiel, who was born in Indiana. And Trump said, "Well, he couldn't be trusted because his parents were Mexican." He has targeted immigrants, African Americans, Latinos. He's targeted POWs, people with disabilities, moslems, and so many others. And every time he does that I get somebody who is worried or scared, writing me a letter or talking to me. And especially children. It's really who Donald Trump is. But when you scare children, you know, like a little boy. His mother wrote to me. She had adopted him from Ethiopia when he was a toddler. There were a lot of children in Ethiopia that were no longer able to live with families. Their parents, their grandparents were not around. And a lot of Americans have adopted children in need like that and this little boy named Felix is now ten years old. He's only lived in the United States. And his mother wrote me and she said that after hearing Donald Trump, he turned to her and asked, 'Mommy, will he send me back to Ethiopia?' That's the kind of fear and anxiety that I hear from immigrant families who are scared to death, especially the children, that Donald Trump is going to put together a big deportation force and go door to door, school to school, business to business, home to home. And it is hard to explain to children. And so I hope that if you know any children who are listening and watching and hearing some of what is said, you will reassure them. I want every boy and girl to know the American dream is big enough for you and there is a place in America for you. And that in this election, we will demonstrate that America is better than what Donald Trump says and represents. But here's what I also want to know. We have a big difference about how best to get the economy going. You know, Trump wants to give trillions and trillions in tax breaks to millionaires and billionaires. You know, that's called trickle down economics, but as with anything when it comes to Donald Trump, he wants to have the biggest tax breaks for the wealthy and corporations than we have ever, ever had. So I believe differently. We're going to invest in the middle class. We're going to invest in you, in your jobs, in your future.  Hillary! Hillary! Well, you know, you do have to feel a little sorry for them. They've had a really bad couple of weeks. But you know, part of the difference in how we see the economy I think comes from our experiences. You know, Donald grew up the son of a millionaire. He got started in business by borrowing $14 million from his dad. So it's not a surprise he wants to keep giving back to the wealthy, because that's his own experience. I grew up differently. My father was a factory worker. Well, my grandfather was a factory worker. My father was a small businessman. I know how hard they worked and I am grateful for the middle class life that they gave us, and that's what I want to make sure everybody gets. That's why I believe we've got to get the economy working for everybody, not just those at the top, and we're going to focus on those issues. We're going to make it possible to have more good jobs in infrastructure. We need to fix our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports and our airports. And we need to make sure that the rich pay their fair share because here's what we've learned, Donald Trump hasn't paid a penny in federal income tax in years. Now this is all allegedly because of course we don't know for sure because he won't release his income taxes but it's allegedly because he lost $1 billion running casinos. Now I ask you, who loses $1 billion running casinos, right? Do you know how hard that is? But think about it, it means he's contributed zero. Zero for our military, zero for our vets, zero for education and health and he has the gall to go around disrespecting our military. He calls the United States military a disaster. Well the only disaster is somebody who can get away with paying no taxes and have the gall to run for president and criticize all the rest of us who have done our part to support America. Now, you've all heard his slogan, Make America Great Again, right? Well that would have maybe some truth to it if he made anything in America and if he bought things that are made in America. There are so many examples but let me just give you one, which is close to your hearts, because Pueblo is one of the largest steel producing cities in America, right? So you know how important it is to support our steel workers and our steel industry. Now, Trump is the guy who went around for a year talking about how he was on the side of workers and all the rest of it. No truth to it, but you know, he did say it over and over again and we've slowly but surely uncovered how little he's done to help anybody except Donald Trump. And he has bought Chinese steel for his buildings. Not American steel. He could be buying American steel, he should be buying American steel. If he wants to make America great again, start by America with American steel. I have a very different idea and in addition to jobs and infrastructure, which uses American steel, we're going to do more on advanced manufacturing, on technology and innovation, on clean energy jobs and we're going to make the economy fairer at the same time. And here's what I want the young people and their families to hear. Senator Sanders and I got together on a plan. We are going to make public college tuition free for working families and debt free for everyone else. If you already have debt because you're trying to get your education, we're going to help you refinance it. It is wrong that you could refinance a home and refinance car but you can't refinance your student debt. And we're going to make it possible for you to pay it back as a percentage of your income. Now, based on this plan, we will save millions of people thousands of dollars, and you can go to hillaryclinton.com/calculator to see how much you and your family can save. Because we want to liberate young people and families from the burden of college debt. And we're also gonna make the economy fairer by raising the national minimum wage so people who work full-time won't be in poverty. And we're going to expand Social Security for those who need it the most - low income seniors and widowed women. And we are going to pass comprehensive immigration reform. I'm going to introduce reform. I can't wait to work with Senator Bennet, I can't wait to have a chance to make sure that we are working on immigration reform from the very beginning. We're gonna finally help dreamers achieve their dream of following their future and becoming American citizens. I also think it is past time, don't you, to guarantee equal pay for women's work? You know I started talking about equal pay years and years and years ago because it's not only a woman's issue it's a family issue. If you have a wife or a daughter or a mother or a sister it's your issue. Right? You know that. So Donald Trump always says, you know I'm playing the woman card. And my response is pretty simple. If being for equal pay and affordable childcare and paid family leave is playing the woman's card, then deal me in. You see I am very excited, I am very excited about what we could do. You know I give President Obama a lot of credit. He inherited the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. I remember, because he called and asked me to come see him shortly after the election. And I didn't know why. He wanted me to be secretary of state but I didn't know that. But I got there and the first thing he says is, "It's so much worse than they told us." And it was. You remember. It was terrible. Millions of people lost their jobs and homes were lost and it was just a horrible time. We have dug ourselves out of that ditch, thanks to everybody's hard work. And we can't ever go back there because believe me, trickle-down economics and refusing to regulate Wall Street and the mortgage market is what got us into that mess in the first place. And Donald Trump wants to get rid of the new rules on Wall Street. He wants to get rid of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which returns money to people who've been defrauded by big companies. Well I have a totally different view. We're gonna keep those and then we're going to tell companies that try to move jobs out of our country that if they try to they're gonna have to pay an exit tax and return every penny, every penny, of tax benefit they've ever gotten. And I've been very clear about how we're gonna pay for what I want to do. It is going to be going after the wealthy, closing the loopholes on corporations. I can pledge to you, I will never raise middle class federal taxes. It is not right. And what I've been trying to do listening to people around the country is figure out what we can do to help you with what I call kitchen table issues. And we thank you very much. What - right now - thank you. You know, I always feel so welcome when I come to Pueblo. I think I'll come here anytime it gets hard in the White House. What do you say? Finally I want to tell you that I want to make it easier for you to raise your kids. You know, there is nothing more important. I'm now a grandmother of two wonderful grandchildren, a little girl, a little boy. And there are too many hard-working families struggling with the cost of raising children. So right now most families with kids get something called the child tax credit. It gives a middle-class family $1000 per child to help you defray the costs. I'm going to double - I'm going to double the child tax credit. That's another $1,000 for young kids to pay for the things you need, whether it's child care, housing, prescription drugs, groceries, or anything else, it is just one example of the tax relief I want to give to working families and we're going to make sure that it gets to the people who need it most. We're going to lift families out of poverty. In fact, the changes I am proposing we think will automatically help more people get out of poverty and we're going to look for other ways to help you. What I am interested in is your success, your futures, your possibilities, your dreams. I want to be a president who makes it possible for more people to feel like they are really moving and their kids are going to have better lives. That is how I was raised. That's what I want for you and every single family, every single child in America! So we have about four weeks ago. It's going to be - it's going to be a race to the finish line, my friends. And here is what I want to ask you. As I said in the beginning, think about everything that is important to you, whether it is jobs and rising incomes, whether it is education, healthcare, whatever it might be. Whether it is protecting our rights. People who have fought so hard, whether it is immigration reform, whatever it might be, think about it because you know what? Those issues will be on the ballot. They may not be listed there, but you could not have two more different people running for president than me and Donald Trump. And I know that if people turn out, I know if people show up, we're going to win and we're going to be able to do everything I've talked about. And so it call comes to down whether or not you take that ballot you get in the mail, you fill it in, you send it back, you do everything you can to make sure that your vote will be counted. You know, when I think about this election, I do think about my grandchildren a lot. Yeah, you, too, right? I'll tell you what, for those of you who aren't grandparents yet, it is an incredible experience. Right? And there is nothing I wouldn't do for them. As I like to say, face time was invented for grandparents, and you get to check in and see how they're doing. But more than that, what kind of lives are they going to have and what kind of country is going to be waiting for them? I know how important it is that families and communities and our country stand behind every child. Make sure every child has a good education, a good school, good teachers, and every zip code in America. Make sure every child -- every child has the healthcare that he or she needs. That's why I work to create the Children's Health Insurance Program, so we can take care of millions of children. That's why every family deserves to have a good job with a good income to be able to be good providers for their kids. I got into this work so many years ago. I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund, right out of law school. And I spent my time trying to figure out how you even the odds for all kids. And the reason I did that is because of my own mother. I didn't know it when I was just a little girl, but I learned as I got older that my mother was abandoned and neglected by her parents and pretty much left on her own, and then at the age of eight, holding her little three-year-old sister's hand, she was put on a train by themselves to go to California to live with grandparents. It turned out the grandparents didn't really want her either. So by the age of 14, she was working in a house as a maid and a babysitter. But here's what I want you to know. It sounds pretty harsh. It was difficult. It made a profound impression on her life. I think my mom, who lived to the wonderful age of 92, I don't think there was a day that went by that she didn't think about being abandoned and being sent away and being pretty much left on her own. But, along the way, people were kind to her. People helped her. The first grade teacher who brought lunch for her every day, because my mother never had any -- the woman whose house she went to work in all those years ago knew my mother wanted to go to high school, so she said to her, Dorothy, if you get up early and you get your chores done, you can go to high school. Now, you'll have to come right back home. That might sound kind of unfortunate, but for my mom, it was a gift, because she really wanted to go to high school. And so my mother always cared about other people. And she taught me in every way she could that nobody is better than anybody else, right. And we need to show each other more kindness and support. And the last thing we need in our country are more bullies making people feel bad about themselves and pushing people away, we should be drawing people toward us. We should be creating the kind of future we want for every one of our children. That's what I think about when I imagine, if I'm so fortunate enough to become president, I think about waking up -- waking up ... I think about waking up in the White House every morning trying to figure out what can I do to help somebody else and who can I work with? How many families and communities across America will work with us to come up with ideas that give every single child the chance to live up to his or her God given potential? That's what I think we are called to do. Whether you're a person of faith or not, the American dream is really premised on people coming together to lift each other up. Nobody, nobody makes it alone. Everybody has somebody who helps them along the way. So let's pull together, Pueblo, let's get out and vote for the kind of positive future we want for ourselves and our children. God bless you, thank you." I have to say it's great to be back on the campaign trail. As you may know, I recently had a cough that turned out to be pneumonia. I tried to power through it, but even I had to admit that maybe a few days of rest would do me good. And I'm not great at taking it easy, even under ordinary circumstances. But with just two months to go until Election Day? Sitting at home was pretty much the last place I wanted to be. But it turns out having a few days to myself was actually a gift. I talked with some old friends. I spent time with our very sweet dogs. I did some thinking. The campaign trail doesn't really encourage reflection, and it's important to sit with your thoughts every now and then. And that did help me reconnect with what this whole campaign is about. People like me ... we're lucky. When I'm under the weather ... now, I just want to have a conversation, and other people can wave their arms and their signs. But I want you to think with me for a minute about how I certainly feel lucky. When I'm under the weather, I can afford to take a few days off. Millions of Americans can't. They either go to work sick, or they lose a paycheck, don't they? Lots of Americans still don't even have insurance, or they do but it's too expensive for them to actually use. So they toss back some Tylenols, they chug orange juice, and they hope that the cough or the virus goes away on its own. Lots of working parents can't afford childcare, which in many states costs as much as college tuition. So for millions of moms and dads, if they get sick, there's no backup. They're on their own, aren't they? That's the story for too many people still in America. When illness strikes, or an accident happens, you feel you're on your own. If you lose your job or can't afford college, you're on your own. If your aging parent starts needing more help, and you don't know what to do, you're on your own. Life events like these are catastrophic for some families, but mere bumps in the road for others. I have met so many people living on a razor's edge, one illness away from losing their job, one paycheck away from losing their home. And that goes against everything we stand for as Americans. Because some things should not come down to luck. Some things should be within reach for everyone, no matter what. Like financial security. Like affordable health care. Like the peace of mind that comes with knowing that if something goes wrong, your family will be okay. And above all, the knowledge that no matter what, your president is fighting for you and will always have your back. That right there, that's why I got into this race. I am running for everyone working hard to support their families, everyone who's been knocked down but gets back up. The factory workers on their feet all day, and the nurses looking after patients all night. I'm running for young people like so many of you here, who dream of changing our world for the better, and for all the parents and grandparents supporting those dreams by dedicating every dollar they can spare to your education. I'm running for the LGBT teenager here in North Carolina who sees your governor sign a bill legalizing discrimination and suddenly feels like a second-class citizen. And if anyone wonders what the costs of discrimination are, just ask the people and businesses of North Carolina. Look at what's happening with the NCAA and the ACC. This is where bigotry leads, and we can't afford it ... not here, not anywhere else in America.  I'm running for women like Janelle Turner. Back in May of last year, Janelle was diagnosed with breast cancer. She went through nearly six months of very tough treatments. Last October, she brought her eight-year-old daughter to one of our rallies in Iowa and they made a huge sign that read, 'Thirteenth chemo yesterday. Three more. Hear me roar!' Wouldn't you want to meet the woman behind that sign? Well, I sure did. So we got talking, and we've stayed in touch. She keeps promising me she'll see me at the inauguration. And I tell her I'll keep working to get there, but she'd better be there too. I'm running for her and all the mothers and fathers trying to get and stay healthy so they can be there for their kids. But perhaps most of all, I'm running for those kids. Standing up for children has been the work of my life. As a lawyer with the Children's Defense Fund, as First Lady in Arkansas, in the White House, as a Senator, I have fought for kids housed in adult jails, kids who have been neglected and abused, kids who couldn't get health insurance because of pre-existing conditions, kids with disabilities so they could go to school. You heard today from someone I've known for a long time, now grown up and a lovely young woman, Anastasia Somoza. I learned from my family and my Methodist faith that we are each called to do all the good we can for all the people we can for however long we can. And to me, that means making sure all our children have the chance to live up to their God-given potentials. So when I meet a little girl in Nevada terrified that her parents are going to be deported, it hits me right in the gut. When I meet a little boy in Flint, Michigan, who can't drink the water at home or in school because it's poisoned with lead, that gets me going. All I want to do is get to work making things better for them. That's why I care so much about national security too. I want to give our kids a safer world. To me, that means a world with strong allies, more friends, fewer enemies, and fewer nuclear weapons. It also means leading the fight against climate change so we can leave our kids a health planet. My opponent in this race disagrees with me on every one of these fronts. Just a few days ago he said that if another country's troops taunted ours ... not fired at them, but taunted them, just taunts ... he'd responded ... he would respond by blowing them out of the water. He would start a war over that. That is just one more reason, my friends, why the stakes in this election are as high as any in our lifetimes. I've been involved in politics in one way or another for many years. It is not an easy business. It can get rough and I've built up some defenses. When it comes to public service, I'm better at the 'service' part than the 'public' part. But this is why I do it, and this is who I'm in it for: to make life better for children and families. And that's what this race has always been about for me. Well, now we're in the final stretch. There are just 54 days till Election Day. Just 54 days till the most consequential vote of our lifetimes. And just a little more than a month until early voting starts here in North Carolina. Let's make these days count, particularly here, because you know what your governor and legislature tried to do ... make it harder for young people to vote, harder for people of color, harder for people with disabilities, harder for the elderly. There can't be any more motivation than that to make sure every young person, every person of color, every person with a disability, every older person turns out and votes. So in these final days, let's try to tune out all the chatter and the nonstop analysis that doesn't often have much to do with what the next president has to do to create good jobs, to create opportunity, to make it possible for every young person to afford to go to college or get the skills that you need for the jobs of the future. Let's talk about what really matters. And here's my promise to you. I'm going to close my campaign the way I began my career and the way I will serve as your president should you give me that great honor ... focused on opportunities for kids and fairness for families. Next week, I'll go to Philadelphia to talk about challenges facing our young people; in Florida, to focus on building an economy that welcomes everyone's contributions, in-cluding people with disabilities; then I'll be back here in North Carolina, to meet with more working families. From now until November 8th, everywhere I go, I'm going to talk about my ideas for our country. My campaign has rolled out detailed plans in 38 different policy areas ... yes, somebody actually counted. Everything from reining in Wall Street to creating good-paying jobs to fighting Alzheimer's to supporting people with autism. You see, I have this old-fashioned notion that if you're running for president, you should say what you plan to do, how you're going to get it done, and how you're going to pay for it. You can read it all on my website, hillaryclinton.com. We even put it in a new book called, you guessed it, Stronger Together. Get a copy of it because it tells you everything Tim Kaine and I intend to do. Now, like a lot of women, I have a tendency to over-prepare. I sweat the details, whether we're talking about the exact level of lead in the water in Flint, or how many North Carolina kids are in early enrichment programs, or the precise interest rate on your student loans right down to the decimal. Because you know what? It's not a detail if it's your kid. It's not a detail if it's your family. It's a big deal. And it should be a big deal to your president.  Now, I confess, I'll never be the showman my opponent is, and that's okay with me. Just look at ... look at the show he put on with Dr. Oz today. But I am going to deliver for you and your family, just like I did for Sarah all those years ago with the Children's Health Insurance Program, that gave her the chance to be the extraordinary young woman she is. And I'll tell you something else. People accuse me of all kinds of things. You probably have seen that. But nobody ever accuses me of quitting. And I will never give up, I'll never walk away, no matter how tough the going gets. I'm actually asking Americans to hold me accountable for my ideas and hold my opponent accountable for his. We don't need a president who says the minimum wage is too high. We need a president who knows that Americans deserve a raise to get to a living wage. We don't need a president who wants to take away people's health coverage. We need a president who wants everyone to have quality, affordable health care. And we don't need a president who apparently thinks only married people deserve paid leave and only mothers stay home with kids. We don't need someone who rushes out a half-baked plan just weeks before an election after decades of ignoring or putting down working moms. We need a president who has spent years fighting for these issues, who has a plan to support all families in all their various shapes. Ask yourself which candidate you can count on to be on your side, respect your family, stand up and fight for you and your kids.  That is who you should vote for on November 8th because as Michelle Obama said in her fabulous speech at the Democratic convention, when we go to the polls this November, the real choice isn't between Democrat or Republican. It's about who will have the power to shape our children for the next four years of their lives. It's also about the kind of country we want to be and what we want to leave behind for future generations. People have to decide, are we going to make our economy work for everyone or just those at the top? Are we going to bring people together or pit Americans against each other and rip our country apart? Are we going to work with our allies to keep us safe, or are we going to put a loose cannon in charge who would risk everything generations of Americans have worked so hard to build?  Now, I have a lot of confidence in the American people and in our country. My opponent keeps running us down, saying we're weak, a disaster, an embarrassment. Every time he says things like that, I think about Janelle and her strength in the face of cancer, or Martha and Sarah in the face of their health challenges, and that little boy in Flint, who gets up every day and goes to school even though he can't drink the water. See, my opponent has America all wrong. There's nothing we can't do when we come together as one nation, set big goals, and pursue them. And the American dream ... the American dream is big enough for everyone to share in its promise. So if you believe the minimum wage should be a living wage, that no one who works full-time should have to raise their child in poverty, join us. If you believe that every man, woman, and child in America has the right to affordable health care and women should be free to make our own health decisions, join us. If you believe ... if you believe your working mother, wife, sister, or daughter deserves equal pay, then join us. Get involved these last 55 days. Go to hillaryclinton.com or text 'join,' j-o-i-n, to 47246. We need volunteers right here in North Carolina. We can't do this without you. And remember, the presidential race isn't the only one this fall. We've got a lot of im-portant statewide races. Let's come together and send Deborah Ross to represent the people in the Senate. Starting on October 20th, you can register and vote early at the same time at any one-stop early voting site in your county. So the heat is on. Spread the word. Tell your friends, your family, your neighbors. If you share our vision for America's future, come be part of helping us shape it. We do not have a minute to lose. We have so many blessings. Now it's our job to deliver on those and to make sure every single person, and particularly every child, no matter who they are, what they look like, or who they love, is part of the American dream now and way into the future. Let that be our message. Let that be our mission. Please come out and help us fight, fight for you, fight for our children, fight for our families. Let's make America all that it should be. Thank you and God bless you!" Please everyone be seated. This is such a great opportunity to lift up the work that so many of you have done for years -- your organizations, individually -- and I am grateful for it because it has helped to guide me in a lot of the work that I've been privileged to do. I want to thank Gwen Hess for her introduction. I want to acknowledge, it's always great to see a woman serve as president in any setting.  I want to congratulate today's honorees. Everyone is so deserving of this recognition. I also want to acknowledge a few others. We have some fierce members of Congress with us today, women whom I admire, who have been my colleagues and friends and with whom I am looking forward to continuing our work: Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee, Congresswoman Gwen Moore, Congresswoman Yvette Clarke, Congresswoman Stacey Plaskett. And I want to give a special shout out to Congresswoman Joyce Beatty. When I saw Joyce recently, she said, 'Well, you are coming, aren't you?' And I said, 'I'm working hard to get it set.' And I am so proud that it did work out, and I thank Joyce for that extra push. I also want to acknowledge someone who had such a profound effect on my life, in every way, someone whom I admire and love, Marian Wright Edelman. This audience is filled with longtime friends and people I went to Wellesley College with that became life-long friends to me, and so many of you who have been on the front lines -- everyone associated with The Black Women's Agenda, I'm thrilled to be with you. I'm thrilled to be associated with you. I'm also thrilled to be back on the campaign trail. As the world knows, I was a little under the weather recently. The good news is, my pneumonia finally got some Republicans interested in women's health. Looking back, I know, I should have followed my doctor's orders to rest, but, my instinct was to push through it. That is what women do every single day, and I felt no different. Life has shown us that we do have to work harder at the office while still bearing most of the responsibilities at home -- that we always need to keep going because our families and our communities count on us. And I think it is more than fair to say, that black women have an even tougher road. And you, your daughters, your granddaughters -- I was pleased to meet Gwen's beautiful granddaughter earlier -- leave the house every morning, put on that game face that we all practice, and enter a society that consistently challenges your worth. With the images you see, the lower pay that so many take home, that try to silence your voices and break your spirits; yet, you remain fierce in the face of these challenges. We see that every day in the businesses you start, the art you create, the children you teach and the communities and organizations you lead. While your stories are often missing from the history books -- make no mistake -- you are the change makers, the path breakers, and the ground shakers. And, you are proof that yes, indeed, black girl magic is real.  Now, I've been blessed to see this magic's influence on kids and communities up close for decades, starting with my first job after law school working with Marian at the Children's Defense Fund. Marian's belief was that every single child had worth and potential and deserved the opportunity to live up to their god potential with the tools and the support that every child needs. And that if we just improve the odds a bit for those suffering in poverty, they could flourish. So she led our team into some very poor communities. We met kids who had dropped out of school because they couldn't afford textbooks or transportation. Some didn't have decent clothes and stayed home to avoid being humiliated in class. Some had untreated medical and dental problems that made it practically impossible for them to learn. Those stories really hurt my heart. But Marian always believed we could deliver help and hope if we never ever gave up. So she taught us ways to think creatively, as well as strategically-- to take our advocacy and turn it into action and results. She sent me to New Bedford, Massachusetts, to go door to door looking for children who weren't in school. That was back before we had a legal requirement that every child, regardless of disability, deserved to get an education. I met a young girl in New Bedford and sat and talked with her on the small back porch of her house. She told me how badly she wanted to learn, but couldn't because schools weren't accessible or welcoming. So Marian had us get to work and change that. We gathered evidence and built a coalition. We helped convince Congress to ensure access to education for all students with disabilities. Marian showed me that to drive real progress, you have to change both hearts and laws. You need both understanding and action. And there is no question, I'm here today because of her example. I also want to recognize pioneers like Barbara Jordan and Shirley Chisholm, who sacrificed and struggled so that I and so many other women running for office could soar. I'm here because of friends and colleagues, like Donna Brazile, Reverend Leah Daugherty and Congresswoman Marcia Fudge ... three black women who ran the Democratic National Convention in July. It was a great four days. It goes to show that black women deserve more than a seat at the table. It's past time you had a fair chance to run the meeting. And let's be clear: I would not be the Demo-cratic nominee for President of the United States were it not for black women like all of you who made noise at the polls this year in support of our campaign -- who did surrogate events, went to barber shops and beauty salons and cafes, got on local radio and local TV to make the case. We've come far together.  And as I said yesterday in North Carolina, I'm going to close my campaign the way I began my career all those years ago at the Children's Defense Fund, and the way that I will serve as your president should I have the great honor of being elected: I will be focused on opportunities for kids and fairness for families. The American people deserve something to vote for, not just against.  And together -- together, we are going to make this a freer, fairer and stronger nation. We're going to fight for the parents struggling to balance family and work and push for affordable child care, paid family leave, and yes, finally, equal pay for women. We'll fight for the young girls who want a fair chance in life, which is why we'll make universal pre-k available so that every child -- no matter what they look like or where they live -- can rise up and be prepared to fulfill their academic destiny. We are also going to do a lot to emphasize STEM education, particularly for girls and women, and I thank the agenda for making that a priority! We'll fight for the entrepreneur who said that more businesses die in the parking lots of banks than anywhere else, which is why we're going to increase access to capital, and we are going to help African American women continue to represent the fastest growing segment of women-owned businesses in America right now. We are going to invest in communities that have been left out and left behind. Urban reinvestment and restructuring that is going to give more people decent housing, access to jobs, the transportation to get to those jobs, rural communities that are too often ignored and denied the services they need. I am a fan of Jim Clyburn's '10-20-30' plan. I am going to do everything I can to push that forward. We'll remember the pain of the Mothers of the Movement and fight for a criminal justice system that actually delivers justice and a future where everyone has respect for the law and is respected by the law. And we are going to pass common-sense reforms to keep guns out of the hands of dangerous people and keep our communities safe.  We'll remember the families neglected in Flint and take action so that no child's life is ever put at risk again when brushing their teeth or drinking a glass of water at din-ner. We'll advocate for everyone concerned about their parents and grandparents as they age, and lift up caregivers and home care workers so older Americans can live in comfort and with dignity.  And we're going to protect and enhance Social Security, which is the main source of income for older women. We'll stand-by-side to make sure that all of our rights are respected and protected ... civil rights and women's rights, LGBT rights, worker's rights and, of course, voting rights. We are coming together at a pivotal moment for our country. Now I do believe that every election is important. But this one feels different, doesn't it? That's because it is. The next 53 days will shape the next 50 years. The future of our children and grandchildren hangs in the balance.  On one hand, we have my opponent, Donald Trump, and in recent weeks, he's tried to restrain himself and clean up his image. But as Maya Angelou once said, 'When some-one shows you who they are, believe them the first time.' And we know who Donald is. For five years, he has led the birther movement to de-legitimize our first black president. His campaign was founded on this outrageous lie. There is no erasing it in history. Just yesterday, Trump again refused to say with his own words that the president was born in the United States. Donald's advisors had the temerity to say, 'He's doing the country a 'service' by pushing these lies.' No, he isn't. He's feeding into the worst im-pulses -- the bigotry and bias -- that lurks in our country. Barack Obama was born in America, plain and simple. And Donald Trump owes him and the American people an apology. So, my friends, there is no 'new' Donald Trump. There never will be. Donald Trump looks at President Obama after eight years as our president. He still doesn't see him as an American.  Think of how dangerous that is. Imagine a person in the Oval Office who traffics in conspiracy theories and refuses to let them go ... no matter what the facts are. Imagine someone who distorts the truth to fit a very narrow view of the world. Imagine a president who sees someone who doesn't look like him, and doesn't agree with him, and thinks, 'That person must not be a real American.' Donald Trump is unfit to be President of the United States. We cannot become insensitive to what he says and what he stirs up. We can't just accept this.We've got to stand up to it. If we don't, it won't stop.  In addition to the president, Donald Trump looks at a distinguished federal judge, born in Indiana, and he sees a Mexican, not an American. He looks at a Gold Star family and sees them as Muslims, not patriotic Americans. He looks at women and decides how our looks rate on a scale of one to 10. I look at America, I see everyone. I see our great diversity, which is one of our core strengths, not our burden. We know who Donald Trump is. Now it's time for our country to show who we are and reject his divisive vision. That's why this election is so important. As Michelle Obama said at the Democratic Convention, 'When we go to the polls this November, the real choice isn't between a Democrat or Republican.' It's about who will have the power to shape our children's lives for the next four years. It's also about the kind of country we want to be, and what we want to leave behind for future generations.  We are at our best when every person gets to share in our nation's promise, contribute to its progress. 'Stronger Together' is not just our campaign slogan. It's the guiding principle for the future we need to build. So Americans, we need to ask themselves: Are we going to make our economy work for everyone or just for those at the top? Are we going to bring people together or pit Americans against each other and rip our country apart? Are we going to work with our allies to keep us safe or are we going to put a loose cannon in charge who would risk everything that generations of Americans have worked so hard to build?  Now in many ways, the profound choice is up to the women in this room. African American women turned out to vote more than any other group of Americans in 2012. This year, once again, you have your hands on the wheel of history and you can write the next chapter of the American story.  Keep up the great work with your Four for 4' campaign. Make sure we get as many people registered and then to the polls as we possibly can. People say to me all time, 'I just -- I don't know what to do about Trump and his supporters and the things he says and inciting violence and all of the terrible activities that are happening this election year.' Well, here's what we can do. Let's reject the cynicism, the bullying, the divisive rhetoric that my opponent uses to make us afraid of each other, afraid of our differences, afraid of our future. I know that all of us in this room are ready to stand up against this ... to rise up for our families, our communities, but most importantly, to show up at the polls this November. With our power and strength, I know -- I believe this, or I would not be standing here before you, I would not have run again for president, I would not deal with all the in-coming brickbats that are hurled my way if I did not in my heart believe with every fiber of my being that together we can build a future where, yes, love trumps hate. Thank you very much. Thank you." And what can I say about one of the best Presidents this country has ever had, Barack Obama? All through this campaign, I have made the point over and over again, Presi-dent Obama saved our country from a second Great Depression. He brought Osama bin Laden to justice. And so much more. I, for one, don't think he gets the credit he deserves for doing what he's done on behalf of our country and the world. And it's not just the President he's been, but the man he is. Even when hateful nonsense is thrown their way, Barack, Michelle, their two beautiful daughters, have represented our country with class, grace, and integrity. As Michelle says, 'When others go low, we go high.' I know I speak for not just everyone in this room but so many tens of millions of Americans: Mr. President, not only do we know you are an American, you're a great American! And you make us all proud to be Americans, too. Let me thank the leadership of the CBC Foundation for this great honor, and to thank all of my friends in the Congressional Black Caucus for it as well. I dedicate it to all the trailblazers who came before me who blazed trails that I could follow in their footsteps ... Barbara Jordan. Shirley Chisholm. I would not be standing here without them. Generations of women and men who struggled and sacrificed and cleared a path for all of us. This award is also for everyone out there helping to break down the barriers holding Americans back, to leaders like all of you, and to a rising generation of young activists. To all those on the front lines dedicated to the proposition that in America, every single child deserves the chance to fulfill his or her God-given potential. This has been the cause of my life ever since I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund all those years ago. And I'm going to close my campaign the way I began my career and the way that I will serve as your president, focused on opportunities for our children and fairness for our families. We have so much work to do together. I've heard many heartbreaking stories over this campaign. One was from Tianna Gaines-Turner, a working mother to three children from Northeast Philadelphia. She testified at the DNC platform meeting in June and told us how her husband had been laid off and she worked in a part-time job. She said she'd been hungry more times than she could count, and that life felt like a maze, because she faced barriers no matter which way she turned. But despite all of this, Tianna has hope. She still believes that her 8-year-old daughter will be president one day. And she believes that this election can make all the difference in the world to her and her family. Let's prove her right. As a country, we have a moral obligation to give her family and every family a chance to rise up and reach their dreams. That is what's at stake in this election. It's not about golf course promotions or birth certificate. It comes down to who will fight for the forgotten, who will invest in our children, and who will really have your back in the White House. We need ideas, not insults, real plans to help struggling Americans in communities that have been left out and left behind, not prejudice and paranoia. We can't let Barack Obama's legacy fall into the hands of someone who doesn't understand that, whose dangerous and divisive vision for our country will drag us backwards. Instead, we need to come together, to get incomes rising with a higher minimum wage, to invest in neglected communities with efforts like Jim Clyburn's 10-20-30 plan, to get guns out of the hands of dangerous people, to fight for a criminal justice system that actually delivers justice, and to make sure that all kids have good schools and good teachers no matter what zip codes they live in. When you really think about it, the choice this November is about so much more than Democrats and Republicans. As Michelle Obama said at the Democratic convention, it's about who will have the power to shape our children for the next four years of their lives. It's also about the kind of country we want to be, what we want to leave behind for future generations. I thank everyone here, who has been fighting for this vision over so many years. I thank all who have supported me. I want you to know I'm not taking your vote or anyone's vote for granted. I'm working every single day to earn your support. And I need your help over the next 52 days to bring our campaign across the finish line together. Barbara Jordan famously said that a government is invigorated when each of us is willing to participate in shaping the future of this nation. So to everyone here tonight, please, keep doing what you're doing, but also help to register voters. Tell others about the clear choice in this election. In some states, early voting is nearly here, so we need to keep the pressure on. Let's send a loud and clear message once and for all: We are stronger together. And no matter what, remember this: Love trumps hate. Thank you all very much!" Before I begin with my remarks, I do want to say how proud I am of our brave first responders working to keep us safe after the attacks of the last weekend in New York, New Jersey and Minnesota. There are now reports of a suspect in custody, but we must remain vigilant. This is a fast-moving situation and a sobering reminder that we need steady leadership in a dangerous world. I'm here to talk about a number of the issues that are part of this election but really, much more than that, they are part of our future ... the kind of country we want to have, the kind of people we want to be and, particularly, what kind of opportunities we should be providing for the young people of America. I have a proud Owl on my staff, Jamira Burley. A Philadelphia native who became an activist working to end the epidemic of gun violence right here in Philadelphia. She loves Temple and we love her. And I also want to thank Lauren for that introduction. Jamira and Lauren are two examples of why I do have so much faith in our future. Your generation is the most inclusive, progressive and entrepreneurial that we've ever seen. And as you heard, when Lauren was in college, she saw challenges facing students of color, but there was no NAACP chapter to support them and promote diversity and inclusion on campus ... so she started one. And Lauren remains committed and engaged, working with an organization called Generation Progress, because she understands that active citizenship is a lifelong job and the call to service never fades. Now, I know that with so much negativity out there, it is really easy to get cynical ... especially about our politics. I remember wrestling with that challenge when I was a student during the Vietnam War. It can be tempting to think that no one will tell you the truth and nothing's ever going to change. But you're here today because you refuse to accept cynicism. You know that the next 50 days will shape the next 50 years. And you see how much needs fixing in our country, from the soaring cost of college to the scourge of systemic racism to the threat from climate change ... but you also know the only way we can meet those challenges is if we meet them together. You're here today because you believe we can do just that. You want something to vote for, not just against. Optimism, not resentment. Answers, not anger. Ideas, not insults. Bridges, not walls. You're also here because you know this election isn't a reality TV show. It shouldn't be about birth certificates or name-calling or stunts to get onto cable news. This election comes down to a choice between two very different visions for America. I believe it's wrong to tear each down. We should be lifting each other up. It's wrong to let income inequality get even worse. We have to make the economy work for everyone, not just those at the top. And it's wrong to put a loose cannon in charge who could start another war. We should work with our allies to keep us safe. It comes down to this: Are we going to pit Americans against each other and deepen the divides in this country, or are we going to be, as I know we can, stronger together? I know what I believe, and I'm going to close my campaign the same way I started my career ... fighting for kids and young people and families. That has been the cause of my life. And it will be the passion of my presidency, and I hope you'll join me. We can't get distracted when the media or my opponent turns this election into a circus. My husband has a saying about that. He calls it majoring in the minors ... getting so wrapped up in stuff that doesn't matter, you forget what's really important to your future and to the future of this country. Take the challenges facing young Americans today. First of all, if you're willing to work hard, you should be able to find a good job that pays well and lets you do what you love and make your mark in the world. But that's been out of reach for too many young people ... trying to find your footing in the wake of the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. That's why Tim Kaine and I have a plan to work with both parties and make a historic investment in good new jobs. We can create millions of jobs and make life a lot better by doing things like connecting every household to broadband by 2020; installing half a billion solar panels; building a cleaner, more resilient electric grid with enough renewable energy to power every home in the country. Next, getting an education should give you a boost, not hold you back. But as you know better than most, tuition keeps going through the roof and debt keeps piling up. I understand that Temple was founded to democratize, diversify and widen the reach of higher education. That is still a vital goal. So I worked with Bernie Sanders on a plan. We came up with a plan that makes public college tuition-free for working families and debt-free for everyone. And if you already have debt, we will help you refinance it and pay it back as a percentage of your income so you're never on the hook for more than you can afford. You can actually see how much you and your family can save under our plan by looking at the College Calculator at hillaryclinton.com. And here's something we don't talk about enough: a four-year degree should not be the only path to a good job in America. People should be able to learn a skill, practice a trade, and making a good living because of that. So we're offering new tax credits to encourage companies to offer paid apprenticeships that let you earn while you learn and do more to dignify skills across the board ... for welders, machinists, health technicians, coders, and so many other fields. Another challenge I hear about all the time is from new parents about how hard it is to balance the demands of work and family in today's economy. Families look different today than they did decades ago, I think we can all agree. Most need two incomes just to get by. And many people now change jobs frequently and have wildly unpredictable schedules, or they have to cobble together part-time work, all without the basic supports available to parents in nearly every other advanced country. That's why Tim Kaine and I have a plan to help working families with quality, affordable childcare, preschool and paid family leave. We fundamentally believe ... the more we can strengthen families, the stronger we will be as a nation. Everywhere I go, young people also share their concerns about the divisiveness and discrimination we see in America today. You aren't ... and you shouldn't be ... satisfied with the progress we've made. You should keep wanting to right wrongs and fight for justice and dignify for all. We see, as Lauren said, too many young black men and women made to feel like their lives are disposable; too many immigrants living in fear of deportation; too many young LGBT Americans bullied; too many young women and men sexually assaulted on campus or in the military or at home. And more than previous generations, you understand that all these challenges are intersecting, and we must take them on together. But you also see a Republican nominee for president who incites hatred and violence like we've never seen before in any campaign. Hate speech being normalized. The dog whistles are out in the open. And yet, despite this, I remain convinced America's best days are ahead of us. In large part, that's because of the inspiring young people I meet every day. I'm inspired by Astrid. I met her in Las Vegas last summer. She was brought to this country from Mexico at the age of four with nothing but a doll, a cross, and the dress she was wearing. Now she's in her twenties and advocating for the rights of undocumented Americans and comprehensive immigration reform. We should all join her in this. I'm inspired by Mikey, who I met in New York. Mikey spent six months in prison for a low-level drug offense. After he got out, Mikey discovered just how hard it is for people who've done their time to find good jobs and opportunities. But he persisted, and he managed to start his own ice cream shop in New York ... and I can recommend, it's delicious. We have to do more to help others get that second chance, including by banning the box and reforming our criminal justice system. I'm inspired by Erica, one of the bravest young women I've ever met. Her mother, Dawn, was the principal of Sandy Hook School who died trying to protect her students. Erica was devastated. But then, she made it her mission to advocate for commonsense gun safety reforms. It's been painful for her ... a lot of hate has come her way and the gun lobby is so powerful ... but Erica won't give up. As she said, 'What if everyone who faced tough odds said, it's hard, so I'm going to walk away? That's not the type of world I want to live in.' That's the spirit that makes this country great ... we might get knocked down, but we get right back up again. And we refuse to quit, no matter what. And that's the spirit we need in this election too. Now, I know that with Washington paralyzed by big money and partisanship, the gap between the change we want and the progress that politics should deliver can look like a chasm. I also know that even if you're totally opposed to Donald Trump, you may still have some questions about me. I get that. And I want to do my best to answer those questions. When it comes to public service, the 'service' part has always easier for me than the 'public' part. I will never be the showman my opponent is ... and you know what, that's okay with me. And it's also true I do spend a lot of time on the details of policy, like the precise interest rate on your student loans, right down to the decimal. But that's because it's not a detail for you. It's a big deal. And it should be a big deal to your president. So here's what I ask any voter who is still undecided: Give us both a fair hearing. Hold us accountable for our ideas, both of us. I can't promise you'll agree with me all the time, but I can promise you this: No one will work harder to make your life better. I will never stop, no matter how tough it gets. In fact, you can read about what Tim and I want to do. We're not keeping it a secret. We've got a book called 'Stronger Together.' But let me tell you a little bit about the values that drive me and my vision for the future because you deserve that from anyone from anyone running for president. I want to share with you the stories of three women who at pivotal moments changed my life and set me on a course of social justice, activism, and public service. The first woman is my mother. Her name was Dorothy, and she was abandoned by her parents as a young girl. She ended up out on her own at 14, working as a housemaid. When I learned about this many years later, I asked how she managed to grow up into a warm, loving person and not become bitter and broken. And here's what she said, one word: 'kindness.' She was saved by the kindness of others. Like the teacher who saw she had nothing to eat at lunch and brought extra food to share. The lesson she passed on to me was simple but powerful: No one gets through life alone. We have to look out for each other and lift each other up. She made sure I learned the words of one of the creeds of our Methodist faith: Do all the good you can for all the people you can in all the ways you can as long as ever you can. That mission guides me still today. When I stumble, it helps pick me up, because there's always more good to do and more people to help if we keep our eyes open, especially kids. When I met a terrified little girl in Nevada who burst into tears because she worried her parents would be deported, it hit me right in the gut. I knew how hard-working her parents were. I knew the sacrifices they were making so that she could have a better life. When I met a little boy in Flint, Michigan who got sick from drinking water poisoned with lead, it just made me so angry and determined to work even harder. Every one of our children deserves the chance to share in the promise of America. The second woman I want to tell you about is Marian Wright Edelman. She was a lawyer for the NAACP in Mississippi, first African American woman to pass the Mississippi bar. She was an ally of Dr. King and Robert Kennedy, and the founder of the Children's Defense Fund, an altogether remarkable person. One day during my first semester in law school, I saw a flyer ... we used to have those, flyers on a campus bulletin board. And Marian was coming to give a lecture. I made sure to be there, and what I heard was captivating. Marian talked about creating a Head Start program in Mississippi and using her legal education to make life better for poor children and families. Something just clicked in my brain. I began to see how I could translate the commitment to helping others I'd learned from my mother, my church, into real social change. I went up to her and I said, 'Could I work for you this summer?' She said, 'Sure, but I can't pay you.' I said, 'Well, I am paying my way through law school, so I have to get paid.' She said, 'Well, if you can figure out how to get paid, you can have a job.' So I figured out how to get a grant to get paid and went to work for her. After graduation, I could have followed my classmates to a high-powered law firm, but I went to work for Marian at the Children's Defense Fund instead. She sent me door to door in New Bedford, Massachusetts on behalf of children with disabilities who were denied the chance to go to school back then. And I remember meeting a young girl in a wheelchair on the small back porch of her house. She told me how badly she wanted an education, but it just didn't seem possible. My heart went out to her and I wanted to help. But it became clear to me that simply caring is not enough. That wouldn't force the public school to build more wheelchair ramps or put more resources into special education. I learned that to drive real progress, you have to change both hearts and laws. So we gathered evidence. We built a coalition. And our work helped convince Congress to ensure access to education for all students with disabilities. And that experience turned me into a lifelong advocate for children and families. I went to South Carolina to investigate the plight of 12- and 13-year-old boys imprisoned alongside grown men who had committed serious felonies. In Alabama I helped expose the racism of segregated academies. In Arkansas I ran a legal aid clinic that provided representation to poor families and prison inmates who could not afford it. When Bill was elected President, a lot of people were surprised, and even threatened, by the idea of an activist as First Lady. But I wasn't about to quit then, either. I fought for universal health care, and ended up working with Republicans and Democrats in Congress to create the Children's Health Insurance Program, which covers eight million kids today.  The third woman who changed my life was named Sophia, the 17-year-old captain of a high school basketball team in New York City. It was the late 1990s, and Democrats in New York were urging me to run for the Senate, and I kept telling them no. After all, no First Lady had ever done anything like that. I myself hadn't run for anything since student council. I'd always been an advocate, not a politician. But then one day I visited that school in New York for an event with young women athletes with Billie Jean King. Hanging above our heads was a big banner that said, 'Dare to compete.' Before my speech, Sophia introduced me. She was tall, and as we shook hands, she bent over and whispered in my ear, 'Dare to compete, Mrs. Clinton. Dare to compete.' Once again, something just clicked. For years I had been telling young women to step up. Participate. Go for what you believe in. Could it be I was afraid to do something I had urge so many others to do? Well, it was a difficult transition, becoming a candidate for the first time back in that New York Senate race. Even all these years later, I confess I don't enjoy doing some of the things that come naturally to most politicians, like talking about myself. But I took that leap then for the same reason I'm running now, to even the odds for those who've got the odds stacked against them, especially children and families. And I've learned that in a democracy, if you want to help the greatest number of people, you have to push for reform from both the outside in and the inside out. We need activists and advocates, entrepreneurs and innovators, teachers and mentors, people who change lives every day in a million quiet ways. We also need strong, principled leaders who can win votes, write laws, allocate resources, and do the slow, hard business of governing. Now, of course, politics can be discouraging. This election in particularly can be down-right depressing sometimes. But it matters. It really does. It matters for our families, our communities, and our country and the world. Our most cherished values are at stake. Every election is important, from school board to state senate to president. But this time is different. We are facing a candidate with a long history of racial discrimination in his businesses, who retweets white supremacists, who led the birther movement to delegitimize our first black President, and he's still lying about it today. He refuses to apologize to President Obama, his family, and the American people. We have to stand up to this hate. We cannot let it go on. And when we do that, we send a clear message: America is better than this. America is better than Donald Trump. Just as important, we have a chance to make real progress together in our country. I need you. I need you as partners, not just for winning this election, but for driving real change over the next four years. The fights ahead of us are bigger than one election, one president, or even one generation. It's going to take all of us working side-by-side to build the kind of future we want. That's why, if I'm in the White House, young people will always have a seat at any table where any decision is being made. So if you believe diversity is America's strength, not America's burden, join us. If you believe the minimum wage should be a living wage and no one working full-time should have to raise their children in poverty, join us. If you believe that climate change is real and that we can save our planet while creating millions of good-paying clean energy jobs, join us. If you believe that every man, woman, and child in America has the right to affordable, quality health care, join us. If you believe we should finally guarantee equal pay for women, join us. And here's how you can join us. Go to iwillvote.com and register today. Register your friends. Register everyone you know. This is going to be close. We need everyone off the sidelines. Not voting is not an option. That just plays into Trump's hands. It really does. Text 'join,' j-o-i-n, to 47246 right now, or go to hillaryclinton.com and sign up to volunteer. I understand here at Temple you're already organizing campaign tailgates at every football game and having a lot of fun doing it. We have 50 days, 50 days, to reach everybody we possibly can, to not only win an election ... that's just the first step ... then to keep the progress going, go even further, make it absolutely clear that we're going to shape a future that represents the best of who we are. So talk to your classmates. Talk to your neighbors. Help us stand up for our best values and reject prejudice and paranoia. You know, I mentioned my mother and the kindness she experienced. Her life was so neglected that when she went to work as that housekeeper/babysitter at the age of 14, it was the first time she ever saw a family that loved each other, where the parents loved their children, cared for them, planned for them, where she learned the lessons that enabled her to be such an extraordinary mother to me and my brothers. Everything I've learned in my life convinces me that love trumps hate.  So please join us in working together. There's no doubt in my mind that young people have more at stake in this election than any other age group. And when you turn out and vote this fall, we will be sending a message much larger than even the outcome. We will say we can build a future where all our children have the opportunity to live up to their God-given potential, no matter who they are, where they're from, what they look like, or who they love. That's the America we believe in. That's the America worth fighting for. That's what we've got to do to stand together. We are stronger together, and let's make sure love trumps hate. Thank you all!" I want to thank Anastasia for that introduction. Didn't she do an amazing job? I first met Anastasia when she was nine years old. She raised her hand at a town hall and she said, 'My twin sister can't speak. Because of that, they put her in a separate class, apart from the rest of the kids. But she can communicate with a computer. And she's very smart and would do just as well as anyone else, if the principal and teachers would just give her a chance.' I was just blown away by this nine-year-old girl ... her confidence and how much she loved her sister. So Anastasia and I have stayed in touch over the years. When she grew up, she became an intern in the Senate. I was so proud of her speech at the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia too. And I'm very excited that she's here with us today. I also want to thank Orlando. It's great to be back in this wonderful city with all of you. You've been through a lot this year. And what has been so notable is you've responded with grace. You've shown the world what Orlando is made of ... strength, love and kindness. This is something we could all use more of right now. I'm here today to talk about how to make our economy work for everyone, but first, I need to say something about two very upsetting incidents that took place over the past few days. First, an unarmed man named Terence Crutcher was shot and killed by a police officer in Tulsa. Then, a man named Keith Lamont Scott was shot and killed by a police officer in Charlotte. I'm sending condolences and prayers to their families; I know a lot of you are as well. There is still much we don't know about what happened in both incidents. But we do know that we have two more names to add to a list of African Americans killed by police officers in these encounters. It's unbearable. And it needs to become intolerable. We also saw the targeting of police officers in Philadelphia last week. And last night in Charlotte, 12 officers were injured in demonstrations following Keith Lamont Scott's death. Every day, police officers across our country are serving with extraordinary courage, honor and skill. We saw that again this weekend in New York and New Jersey and Minnesota. Our police handled those terrorist attacks exactly right. And they likely saved a lot of lives. I've spoken to many police chiefs and other law enforcement leaders who are as deeply concerned as I am and deeply committed, as I am, to reform. Why? Because they know it is essential for the safety of our communities and our officers. We are safer when communities respect the police and police respect communities. I've also been privileged to spend a lot of time with mothers who have lost children, and young people who feel that, as far as their country's concerned, their lives seem disposable. We've got to do better. And I know we can. And if I'm elected president, we will ... and we will do it exactly together, which is the only way it can be done. Look, I know I don't have all the answers. I don't know anyone who does. But this is certain: too many people have lost their lives who shouldn't have. Sybrina Fulton has become a friend of mine. Her son, Trayvon Martin, was killed not far from where we are today. Sybrina says, 'This is about saving our children.' And she's absolutely right. We need to come together, work together ... white, black, Latino, Asian, all of us ... to turn the tide, stop the violence, build the trust. We need to give all of our kids, no matter who they are, the chance to grow up safe and healthy in their communities and in our country. Now, there are so many issues we need to take on together, and that's why we're here today. Because in just 48 days ... can you believe it, 48 days ... Americans will go to the polls and choose our next president. Well, I hope so. I hope so. I want to just stress that our campaign is about the fundamental belief that, in America, every person, no matter what you look like, who you are, who you love, you should have the chance to go as far as your hard work and dreams will take you. And that is the basic bargain that made our country great, and it's our job to make sure it's there for you and future generations. Building an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top, is the central challenge of our time. And I take it personally, because I'm a proud product of the American middle class. My grandfather started working in a lace mill in Scranton, Pennsylvania, when he was just a boy, and worked there for 50 years. Thanks to him, my dad was able to go to college and then start his own small business, printing fabric for draperies. And because of my dad and my mom, I could head out into the world and follow my dreams. Every American family should be able to write a similar story for themselves and their children. And history has shown us ... our history has shown us that the strongest growth in our economy is inclusive, broad-based growth ... when everyone can contribute to our prosperity and share in its rewards. Now, here is just one example. The flood of women into the American workforce over the past several decades was responsible for more than $3.5 trillion in economic growth. But as women's labor participation has slowed in recent years, due in part to our failure to provide family-friendly policies like paid leave and affordable childcare, so our economic growth wasn't as strong as it could have been. Women who want to work deserve to work. And whenever they are denied that opportunity, it's not fair to them ... and we all lose out. In a competitive 21st century global economy, we cannot afford to leave talent on the sidelines. When we leave people out or write them off, we not only shortchange them and their dreams, we shortchange our country and our own futures. That's one reason why I care so much about supporting working parents. It's one reason why I'm such a strong supporter of comprehensive immigration reform. Because bringing millions of undocumented workers into the formal economy will decrease abuse and exploitation, and it will increase our economic breath and our tax base. It is estimated if we did this, despite what you hear from the other side, we would increase our gross domestic product by an estimated $700 billion in 10 years. Now, we need that. It's also one reason why we've got to break down barriers of systemic racism, including under-investment that has held communities of color back for generations. That's part of building an inclusive economy, too. And it's why I believe we need to do more to help young people, who are left behind in the wake of the Great Recession, find those strategies and opportunities that will get them moving ahead again. And we've got to help older Americans who've displaced by automation and outsourcing in our changing economy.  And too often, training and retraining doesn't work as it should. If you don't have a four-year degree, if you haven't really had the chance to upgrade your skills over the years, it's hard to just make a course correction. We need to have apprenticeships and community college and technical programs, starting in high school and moving all the way up to older workers. Whether you're trying to start your career or you've spent decades contributing to our economy, you deserve better. Now, these are some of the elements of my plan for an inclusive economy, and I'm going to hold up the book Tim Kaine and I have put out because we've actually put in one place all of our plans. You see, we have this old-fashioned idea if we're asking you to support us, we should tell you what we're going to do. Right? And today I want to focus on one area that hasn't gotten enough attention. It concerns a group of Americans who are too often invisible, overlooked, and undervalued, who have so much to offer but are given too few chances to prove it. Now, that's been true for a long time, and we have to change it. I'm talking about people with disabilities, men and women, boys and girls, who have talents, skills, ideas, and dreams for themselves and their families just like anybody else. Whether they can participate in our economy and lead rich, full lives that are as healthy and productive as possible is a reflection on us as a country. And right now, in too many ways, we are falling short. We've got to face that and do better for everyone's sake because this really does go to the heart of who we are as Americans. I intend this to be a vital aspect of my presidency.  I want to bring us together as a nation to recognize the humanity and support the potential of all of our people. And I want you to hear this because this is not well-known. Nearly one in five Americans lives with a disability. Now, some of those disabilities are highly visible, some much harder to notice. If you don't know you know someone with a disability, I promise you, you do. But their disability is just one part of who they are. Across the country, people with disabilities are running businesses, teaching students, caring for our loved ones. They're holding public office, making breakthrough scientific discoveries, reporting the news, and creating art that inspires and challenges us. They're veterans whose service and sacrifice has protected our freedom and kept our country safe. They're working in the White House. Just last year a young woman named Leah Katz-Hernandez became the first West Wing receptionist who is deaf. So when world leaders come to the White House, the person who greets them is Leah. Think of the message that sends about how our nation sees the talent in everyone. And Americans with disabilities are working on presidential campaigns. I know because several of my staff and advisors have disabilities, and they're doing phenomenal work. I'm grateful to them every single day. And people all over America would say the same about their boss, their colleague, their employee, their family member with a disability. Now, over the past few days, our country has taken leaps forward, not just in recogniz-ing the humanity and dignity of people with disabilities, but in making long-overdue changes in our schools, workplaces, and communities so everyone can be part of our shared American life. Even so, not that long ago if you had a disability ... if you couldn't see, couldn't walk, lived with dyslexia or muscular dystrophy or some other health issue ... that one fact was allowed to define your entire life. Because of that and that alone, the world was closed to you. Not all of it and not for everyone, but for most people, basic essential things that others could do you couldn't and never would. And that was that. I saw this for myself, as Anastasia said, years ago when I was just starting out as a young lawyer working with the Children's Defense Fund. One of my first assignments was to figure out why so many American kids weren't in school. We looked at census tract numbers and we said, okay. How many young people between five and 18 live in this census tract? Then we would look at school enrollment numbers, and there'd be a gap. And we would say, wait a minute. Where are the kids? Why aren't they in school? I went door to door, along with people across our country, going into different communities. I was in New Bedford, Massachusetts. We saw a notable disparity there, and I soon realized that part of the problem was kids were stuck at home because of disabilities. There were kids who were hard of hearing, kids with intellectual disabilities. I remember one little girl in a wheelchair who was smart, curious, desperate to go to school. But that chair held her back. Not all schools had ramps or accessible bathrooms. Most teachers and aides weren't trained to help her. So she didn't get to go. It felt like the world had said to her, sorry, kid. Your life just isn't going to be worth very much. And she and her family weren't rich. They weren't powerful. So what could they do about it? That little girl reminded me of another little girl, my mother. She didn't face the same challenges, but she, too, was clocked from a full and happy childhood ... abandoned by her own parents, raised by grandparents who didn't want her, and ended up on her own when she was just 14, supporting herself as a housemaid. But then something finally went her way. The woman she worked for encouraged her to finish high school. And that family showed my mother what a happy family looked like. After many lonely years, it was the start of a better life. The core lesson from her childhood was that none of us gets through life alone. We all have to look out for each other and lift each other up. And I remembered that, sitting with that little girl in a wheelchair. My colleagues and I at the Children's Defense Fund, along with others, gathered the facts, and we built a coalition of activists and families across America, and together we helped convince Congress to pass a groundbreaking law saying that children with disabilities have the same right to be educated in public school just like any other kids. So we opened the doors to school, and then some years later I was so excited when the Americans with Disabilities Act finally passed, 26 years ago. It was bipartisan. The notion that workplaces and public spaces belong to everyone was something Democrats and Republicans both supported. And, by the way, I'm proud that some of the Democrats and Republicans who passed that landmark bill are supporting my campaign because they know where my heart is on this. As Secretary of State, I appointed the first-ever special advisor for international disability rights because I wanted America to stand up for the rights and dignity of people with disabilities all over the world. And over the years, I've spent a lot of time working for kids with disabilities. In addition to Anastasia, who spoke at the convention, another young man, Ryan Moore, also spoke there. I first met Ryan when he was 7 years old. I was fighting for health care reform. He was born with a rare form of dwarfism. But he never let that stop him. He's had so many surgeries, we've lost count of them. But his family was always there for them and ... for him. And he was the advocate for himself as he got older. Now he's a college graduate working in the technology department of his local school district. And he's just one of the most optimistic people you'll ever meet. Listening to Ryan and Anastasia tell their stories at the convention this July made me think about all the people who never got the chance, never got the chance to get the education, let alone go to college, become forces for change. And I thought about all of the mothers and fathers across America who love their children more than anything and want so badly for them to have every opportunity that they deserve to have in America. I'll never forget something that the actor Christopher Reeve said. Some of you may be too young to know who he was. He was a huge star. He played Superman. He was unbelievably good-looking. He and his wonderful wife were friends of mine. And then he was paralyzed in a horse-riding accident. He once said that he had been thinking about a phrase that comes up a lot in our politics, 'family values.' 'Since my accident,' he said, 'I've found a definition that seems to make sense. I think it means that we're all family and we all have value.' I couldn't agree more. We've come a long way since the fall of 1973, when I was going door to door talking to kids and families. But make no mistake. We still have a lot more work to do. We can't be satisfied, not when over 60 percent of adults with disabilities aren't in the workforce, not when businesses are allowed to pay employees with disabilities a subminimum wage [cheers and applause], not when people with physical and intellectual disabilities are still subjected to stigma and discrimination every single day. We've got to build an inclusive economy that welcomes people with disabilities, values their work, treats them with respect.  Now, one advocate after another has told me the same thing, 'We don't want pity. We want paychecks. We want the chance to contribute.' As president, I'm going to give ... give them that chance. First, we're going to focus on jobs and incomes. I'm going to fight to give more Americans with disabilities the chance to work alongside those without disabilities and do the same jobs for the same pay and benefits. People with disabilities shouldn't be isolated. They should be given the chance to work with everyone else. And we're going to eliminate the subminimum wage, which is a vestige from an ugly, ignorant past. Good work deserves fair pay, no matter who you are. Second, we're going to work with our colleges and universities to make them more accessible to students with disabilities. To have a truly inclusive economy, we need a truly inclusive education system. So let's raise our standards. For too long, accessibility has been an afterthought. Let's make it a priority in our curriculums, our classrooms, and the technology our students use. It's like what Anastasia said about her sister. She can communicate through a computer. Then let's make sure kids who can communicate that way have the opportunity to do so. Third, we're going to partner with businesses and other stakeholders to ensure those living with a disability can get hired and stay hired. As part of that, we'll launch a new effort we're calling Autism Works to help people with autism succeed in the workplace. Fourth, let's build on the success of the Americans with Disabilities Act by finally ratifying the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It has the strong backing of leaders across the political spectrum, and it's a chance to show American values and American leadership. And I have to tell you ever since I was first lady, I have had the great privilege of traveling the world on behalf of our country. When I was secretary of state, I went to 112 countries. And one of the things that I have noticed is how far behind many countries are in how they treat people with disabilities. Very often people with disabilities from the time they are babies and toddlers are locked away, basically forgotten. I want us since we have been the leader in this area to get that ratified and then to demonstrate to other countries what we have done and are doing to give dignity and opportunity to people with disabilities. Now, these ideas are just a start. We're working with advocates to come up with even more. If you've got an idea, we want to hear it. Go to hillaryclinton.com and leave your ideas because we are really welcoming this debate. This issue is very close to my heart. I've always believed that the ultimate test of our society is more than the size of our economy or the strength of our military. It's how we treat our fellow human beings, especially the most vulnerable among us. And on this front especially, I intend for my presidency to move our country forward. Together, we will make our economy and our country more welcoming to people with disabilities because we all win when everyone gets to share in the American dream. Now, if you want some proof, let me tell you this story. It's a story of a woman named Freia David. Now, some of you may have read about Freia in the Boston Globe. I've carried a copy of that article around with me because I loved it so much. Freia has Down syndrome. When she was 21, she got her first job, at the local McDonald's. Her mother was a little worried, as any mother would be. She wondered, would Freia be able to handle being independent? Could she handle the job? Would she even pass the six-month training program? Well, not everyone in her class passed, but Freia did. And then ... then she excelled at that job for 32 years. Her colleagues loved her, and she loved them. The restaurant became such a home to her that she'd bring her family there on off days just to hang out.  Earlier this year, Freia began to show signs of early-onset dementia. She knew that meant she had to stop working, but 32 years is a pretty good run, isn't it? It broke her heart. One thing that made it a little better is the whole staff threw a party in her honor. Her family hoped a few people might show up. And in the end, nearly 100 people did: customers, colleagues and friends from over the years. The party lasted three hours. And at one point, one of Freia's former managers asked for everyone's attention. She turned to Freia, and she said, 'We love you. We appreciate you. We respect you. And we are all better people for having you in our lives.' My friends, after years of hard work and treating people right, isn't that what we all want to hear? Isn't that America at our best? We don't thrive on tearing each other apart, or separating ourselves. We know we are stronger together. We believe in equality and dignity for all. And when we fall short, we strive to do better, not to blame and scapegoat but to improve ourselves, to move toward becoming that more perfect union that our founders hoped for. This election is a chance for us to move still closer to that goal, to make sure everyone can contribute to a growing and prospering America, to say loudly and clearly in this country, no one's worthless, no one's 'less than.' We're all of value. In the United States of America, the greatest country in the world, we believe everyone is created equal. And you know what else we believe? We all believe love trumps hate. Thank you all."   Thank you. And I think her ... I think her patients at Duke Regional are in for a treat because not only the skills that she learned here at Wake Tech but that personality, that get-up-and-go personality, is going to mean a lot to the people she's taking care of. So Christine, thank you and Godspeed. Now, I have to thank ... I have to thank Dr. Stephen Scott, the president of Wake Tech Community College, all the administrators, the faculty, and the students of Wake Tech. Now, Dr. Scott told me that the enrollment's about 73,000. And what a tribute to what this institution represents. And I am a huge, huge supporter. I just see America differently. I think there's nothing we can't do if we make our minds up, roll up our sleeves, get working together, support institutions like Wake Tech, support people like Christine. And that's what I intend to do. Now, I want to thank your mayor, Mayor McFarlane. Thank you so much for being here. State Senator Dan Blue, Jr. I also want to recognize Linda Coleman, candidate for lieutenant governor of North Carolina. Linda came so close last time. And this time are you going to bring her over the finish line? And I'll tell you somebody else I'm really excited about. That is the Democratic candidate for the Senate, former State Representative Deborah Ross. I have watched ... I have watched the campaign she's run and the intensity and the incredible passion that she brings to it. I'll tell you what, we sure could use her in Washington representative North Carolina. I want to thank all the elected officials who are here, and I want to do a special shout-out to a long-time friend of my husband's and mine, somebody who we admire so much who did really transform this state during his governorship. That's former Governor Jim Hunt. Now, there's a lot that I want to talk about today. But let me start with this because you may or may not know. Today is National Voter Registration Day. And you see some signs people are holding. 'I Will Vote.' Now, that's not only a great sign that shows you're committed to vote, but it's a website. And you can go to iwillvote.com to make sure you are registered. And I hope you all will, and I hope you'll tell everybody that you know to do the same, because we want to make sure people are registered. And there is still time to get registered here in North Carolina, and I hope that you will, because think about everything that's at stake in this election right here in North Carolina. The very mean-spirited, wrong-headed decision by your legislature and governor to pass and sign House Bill 2 has hurt this state. But more than that, it's hurt people. It has sent a message to so many people that, well, you're not really wanted. You're not really part of us. I think the American dream is big enough for everybody. The other thing your governor and legislature did was everything they could to make voting harder for people. Now, they were pretty blatant about it. Make it harder for people of color. Make it harder for the elderly. And make it harder for the young. Now, some of that's been rolled back, thankfully, because it was so wrong and, I would argue, unconstitutional. But the best way to show, hey, in a democracy like ours we can have the most vigorous, vibrant debate, that's what it's about. But we want everybody to exercise his or her right to vote. That's the way we're supposed to be making decisions. It distorts our democracy if some groups of people try to prevent other people from being able to do that. Now, I have won elections and I have lost elections, so I know what the difference is. But I'll tell you this: I believe in what our founders established for us, to govern ourselves, to continue to widen the circle of opportunity, and that includes the opportunity to be heard, to express yourself, your voice and your vote. And the best way to reaffirm our commitment to that fundamental American value is to show up and vote, and demonstrate the importance of your vote.  I believe that we may have a record-setting turnout in this election. Some folks who follow this are saying we could have the biggest turnout we've ever had. Now, that kind of makes sense because you could not have two more different visions about where we want our country to go in the future, and who we are fighting for. But early information is actually quite encouraging. We're seeing spikes in early voting. And we're seeing voting rates among African Americans, Latinos, and young people going up. And for the first time, the estimate is that young people could represent 25 percent of the vote. Now, I would love to see that. Obviously, I hope people vote for me. But I would love to see that because every election is about the future. And honestly, it's more about the future of young people and children than it's ever been because of the difference in the approaches and the experiences of me and my opponent. Now, last night I got a chance ... I got a chance to say a few things about what I want to do if I'm so fortunate enough to be elected as your president. And I do have this old-fashioned idea that if I'm asking for your vote, I should tell you what I want to do. And I also got to convey my excitement about what we can do together. You see, I really think the central question in this election is what kind of country we want to be and what kind of future we want to build for our children and our grandchildren. And I also got to convey my excitement about what we can do together. You see, I really think the central question in this election is what kind of country we want to be and what kind of future we want to build for our children and our grandchildren. I think about that a lot, in part because I started out working for the Children's Defense Fund. It's always been my passion about what we can do [applause] to help more kids live up to their God-given potential. And during this campaign, people have asked me, 'Well, how did you get interested in that? 'And the simple answer is my mother had such a neglected childhood. She was basically abandoned by her parents, sent to live with grandparents who didn't want her. By the age of 14, she was out on her own working in a home babysitting, keeping house. She was basically a maid. And when I think about my mother's own life and how she told me when I was old enough to understand how different her life was than the one that she created for me and my brothers, she would say she was so often saved by the kindness of other people. We overlook the importance of just how we treat each other, the respect we show, the kindness, the love that we show. And I'm well aware that's not something you put necessarily on a campaign website, but I've been talking about it because I think we've got to re-assert our fundamental connection to each other. When my mother was in first grade, she never had any food, and her first grade teacher noticed that. In those days, they just brought food, a little bag of food, then they'd sit in the classroom and eat it, and my mother never had any food. And that first grade teacher noticed that and began to bring extra food but without embarrassing her. She would say, 'You know, Dorothy, I brought too much food. Would you like this sandwich? Would you like this milk?' And it wasn't until she herself was much older that my mother realized that that teacher fed her for that school year, something she didn't have to do, but her love for her students, her recognition of a child who wasn't well taken care of meant that she stepped in. And then when my mother worked as a maid, she really wanted to go to high school. She started working right before she would have been in high school because she had to get out of her grandparents' home. And the woman she worked for realized how much my mother wanted to go to high school, and so she said to her, 'If you get up early ... it sounds like Christine getting up so early. If you get up early and you get your chores done, you can go to high school.' And that's what my mother did for four years, she got up early and then she literally had to run, run to get to high school. It sounds harsh, but not for my mom. She thought it was such a great gift of kindness that this woman gave her a place to live, gave her food to eat, gave her the chance to go to high school. So when I talk about us being stronger together, I'm not just talking about what our government needs to do, I'm talking about what each of us can do to contribute. We do need to make sure ... we need to make sure that our economy does work for everyone not just those at the top, and that means we've got to make investments in more good, new jobs, infrastructure jobs, advanced manufacturing jobs, technology and innovation, clean renewable energy jobs. And we've got to do more to help small businesses because that's where most of the new jobs will come from. As I said last night, my dad was a small businessman. When he got out of the Navy after World War II, he started this small business printing drapery fabrics, and he had a print plant in Chicago. It was just ... it was dark room. There was no natural light. He had two long tables and he'd spread that fabric on the table, and then he would take silkscreens ... if you've ever seen one ... and he'd start at one end and he'd put it down, he'd pour the paint in, and he'd take the squeegee and he'd lift it up and he'd go all the way down to the end of one table, and then he'd start on the other table, and he would do that until he got the job done. And I would help him out from time to time, so I knew how hard he worked. But he was so proud that he could give us a good middle class life because his dad was a factory worker. And so he was able to do what we want to see in America, keep going, keep reaching, move as high as your hard work and ambition will take you. So I want us to have an economy that works for everyone, to grow the economy, to create more jobs, but I also want a fairer economy because ... when you work hard, you should not be still in poverty at the end of the year. But if you are a minimum wage worker, if you work full time minimum wage, you will make $15,000 a year. Two-thirds of minimum wage workers are women, most of them with families to support. And I've talked to a lot of these women. Sometimes I'll be at a caf.. or sometimes I'll be in a store and I'll just start talking to them, and they will tell me ... it's one of the most humbling experiences about being out there talking to people is that if you're open to it, folks will tell you what's on their minds and their hearts. So I've met women who are working two full-time minimum wage jobs to make enough to be able to support their kids. So we need to raise the national minimum wage and ... and we need to guarantee, finally, equal pay for women's work because ... number one, it's fair. It's fair. And if your mother, your wife, your sister, or your daughter is working, don't you want to see her paid what she should be paid for the work she does? And the other thing I want to do, I want to make sure that more companies offer profit-sharing to their employees who help make the profits in the first place. It makes no sense to me that sharing in profits would only go to the top executives. I want more people in more jobs to realize the benefit of their hard work. And last night at the debate, one of my guests was Mark Cuban. Now, Mark Cuban, who is a real billionaire, by the way, he has used profit-sharing from his very first successful business, and he not only used it while the business was going, but when the business was sold. He shared the profits from the sale and made 300 of his employees millionaires overnight. Now, that's the kind of business leadership I want to hold up, because what we've seen from my opponent is someone, who his own campaign manager has said, builds a lot of businesses on the back of the little guy, stiffing people ... dishwashers, painters, plumbers, architects, glass installers, marble installers, drapery installers ... across America. Some of them have come forward. You can go to our website; you can see their stories. It's heartbreaking. And as I said last night, I'm really glad my dad never had a contract with Donald Trump when he was running his small business. And in addition to making the economy fair, we've got to make it work better for working families who are trying to balance family and work. It's really hard out there, isn't it? And just listening to Christine's story ... getting up at 4:00 and studying, getting kids up at 7:00, going to school, going to work, going to another job ... that's not an uncommon story. We've made it really hard for a lot of people. So here's what I think we need to do, and it's not a luxury, it's a necessity ... because I want more families to be able to go as far as their hard work will take them. And I've heard so many stories. They've told me ... people have told me about the difficult choices they face and the stresses they're under. So let's finally, since every other advanced economy has already done this, let's have paid family leave so that when you're sick or your spouse or your child is sick or you have a newborn, you can take care of your loved ones. And let's have earned sick days so that you don't lose your job because you're sick or you go to work because you're sick. And let's finally have affordable childcare, which in lots of states costs as much or more than in-state college tuition. I don't think any family should ever have to pay more than 10 percent of your income for childcare, and we're going to fix that so that becomes the norm. And then let's make sure that every educational opportunity is available without sending you into debt and breaking your budget. Now, tomorrow in New Hampshire, Bernie Sanders and I are going to talk about the college plan for debt-free college at public universities that he and I have worked on since the end of our primary. And I want ... I want every family in North Carolina to know help is on the way. And we're also going to work so that you can refinance the debt you already have at much lower rates and get it paid off a lot sooner. Now, how are we going to do that? Well, we're going to go where the money is, and the money is at the top. We're going to go after millionaires, billionaires and corporations. We're going to raise taxes on millionaires and billionaires, and we're going to close corporate loopholes. And I believe that we can get that done, in part because you're going to send Deborah Ross to the Senate so we're going to have another Democratic senator. But also because our government needs to start working for everybody again ... not just those who have lobbyists and lawyers and influence. That hasn't worked out so well. We've got to get back to first principles. Our job is to give the maximum opportunities to the maximum number of Americans and to especially focus on people who are working their way out of poverty and people in the middle class who want to go as far as they can go. Let's be a government for the struggling, the striving and the successful. So I'm excited about what we can do. I really am. And I'm going to leave it to the fact-checkers to go through all of ... all of Donald Trump's claims. There were ... there was a lot of work for fact-checkers last night. But here's a couple of things that caught my attention. He actually bragged about gaming the system to get out of paying his fair share of taxes. In fact, I think there's a strong probability he hasn't paid federal taxes a lot of years. And this is a man who goes around calling our military a disaster; who goes around criticizing every institution, from health care to education, our vets. But he probably hasn't paid a penny to support our troops or our vets or our schools or our health care systems. And when I confronted him with the reasons why he won't release his tax returns ... and I got to that point where I said, well, maybe he's paid zero ... he said that makes him smart. Now, if not paying taxes makes him smart, what does that make all the rest of us? I got to tell you, Bill and I have been blessed. We didn't come from millionaire families. My husband's father ... his biological father died before he was born. His mother went to nursing school in order to support him. They struggled. They worked hard. And America gave him the chance to get a good education, pursue his dreams, end up being President. My dad, as I told you, worked hard. So Bill and I have released all of our tax returns going back 40 years. And if you look, you'll see that we paid the highest marginal rate. We tried to give 10 percent to charity. Because we believe in this country and we believe with the blessings that we've been given, we should do our part. The other thing he admitted last night was that he actually rooted for the housing crisis to happen. I don't think I'd make a big bragging point out of that. But he seemed to feel like, hey, it shows you how smart I am. He basically said, 'Yeah, if the housing market crashes, I can go in and buy stuff and make some more money.' I got to tell you, what kind of person believes that? What kind of person would want to root for nine million families losing their homes? One who should never be president is the answer to that question. And he made it very clear that he didn't prepare for that debate. At one point he was kind of digging me for spending time off the campaign trail to get prepared. But just trying to keep track of everything he says took a lot of time and effort. And I said, 'Yeah. You know what? I did prepare. And I'll tell you something else I prepared for. I prepared to be president of the United States, and I think that's good.' So as I said in the beginning, we have two different visions here. I believe we are stronger together. That is at the core of what I've done over my years in advocacy and public service. I believe that America is already great, and it is our responsibility to make it even greater. I believe that as we make our economy work for everyone, we also need to keep our country safe, and we need to provide strong, steady leadership in the world with our allies and our partners. I've laid out my views on a range of national security and foreign policy issues. I've laid out my plan for defeating and destroying ISIS. And what we hear from my opponent is dangerously incoherent. It's unclear exactly what he is saying. But words matter. And last night it sounded like he was basically telling our treaty allies in Asia, "Hey, we're not sure we're going to be there for you even though we have a mutual defense treaty." Words matter. People here that and they start to doubt America's word, America's intention. I felt like I had to jump in and say, 'I just want to be clear. We will honor our treaties. We will support our allies and our partners.' This is not reality TV. This is real. It's as real as it gets. so we're going to get the economy working for everybody, not just those at the top. We're going to keep America safe, provide strong, steady leadership, and we are going to bring our country together across the divides that have pitted Americans against each other. Economic worries are not the only ones keeping families up at night, are they? There's still a lot we don't know about the recent incidents in Tulsa and Charlotte, but this we do know: We've got to bring communities together. We have to listen to each other. We have to make it clear that everyone is safer when there is respect from the law for the communities they protect, and respect for the law from the communities that are protected.  And we've got to do something about the epidemic of gun violence that has taken too many, too many lives in our country. Again, I think we can come together. A very long majority of Americans and a majority of gun owners believe in comprehensive background checks. They believe in the Second Amendment, as I do. They believe in the right of individuals to have guns, as I do. But they believe, along with me, that we should not let guns fall into the wrong hands of people who will use them to kill other people, and make it so easy to get them. So there's work to do. But it's great work. It's important work, starting right here in North Carolina. We have 42 days left. This election's going to be close. They all are these days. That's why every call you make, every door you knock on, every friend you register to vote, to make the difference. I want you, if you can, to text 'join,' j-o-i-n, to 47246, or go to hillaryclinton.com and sign up to volunteer here in North Carolina. And I know there's a big overflow room, and I'm told they can hear me, so to my friends in the overflow, we want you to be just as involved as anyone else. Thank you for coming. So remember, here in North Carolina, starting on October 20th, you can register and vote early at the same time at any one-stop early voting site in your county. And remember, it's not just the presidential race. It's the governor's race, the lieutenant governor's race, the U.S. Senate race, and other races up and down the ticket. Because we want to prove who we are as Americans in this election. We're not fearful. We don't want to build walls. We want to build bridges. We don't want to turn against each other. We want to work with one another. We want to set big goals again here in our country. I've got some big goals that I know we can achieve. Take climate change, which my opponent says is a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese. I think it could be one of the biggest economic opportunities our country has ever seen, and I want us to take advantage of that. Do the right thing and benefit from it. That's what I'm offering. We're going to deploy a half a billion more solar panels in the first four years of my administration. And we will produce enough clean power to power every home in America within 10 years. And we're going to lead the world because some country is going to be the clean energy superpower of the 21st century. Now, the way things are stacking up, I think it's either going to be Germany, China, or us. I want it to be us and it will be us. That is exactly right. I love this country. I'm proud of this country. I want to be a leader who brings people together in our country, sets those goals, gets about the business of achieving them, and proves once and for all that love trumps hate. Thank you!" Bernie's campaign energized so many young people, some of you in this crowd. And there is no group of Americans who have more at stake in this election than young Americans because so much of what will happen will affect your lives, your jobs, the kind of country we are, the kind of future we want to build together. I'm proud of the primary campaign that Bernie and I ran. We ran a campaign about issues, not insults. And when it was over, we began to work together to try to figure out how we could take the issues we agreed on and come together knowing we are stronger together to come up with specific policies in education, in health and so much else. Thank you, Bernie. Thank you for your leadership, and thank you for your support in this campaign. Now, we're going to need some help in Washington. And I hope New Hampshire will send your now Governor Maggie Hassan to Washington as your senator. And I sure hope you will send Carol Shea Porter back to Washington. Isn't this one of the strangest elections you've ever seen? I ... I really sometimes don't know what to make of it. Standing on that debate stage the other night, I was especially thinking about that. And, look, I have been very clear about what I want to do if I'm fortunate enough to be elected president. And Americans increasingly are zeroing in on the fact that we're not only electing a president, we're electing a commander-in-chief. We're looking to see who can protect our country and provide steady and strong leadership around the world. I was very honored today to earn the endorsement of John Warner, a retired Republican senator, World War II veteran, former ... former secretary of the Navy who served under two Republican presidents. I served with him on the Senate Armed Services Committee. And I have the deepest respect for his patriotism. And it's a great honor. He's never endorsed a Democrat for president before. And I'm also very grateful that a number of Republicans and Independents here in New Hampshire have announced their support for this campaign. In fact, it is really an extraordinary honor that 150 Republicans here in New Hampshire are supporting this campaign because they understand how high the stakes are.  The next ... the next 40 days will determine the next 40 years. So I'm going to close my campaign the way I started my public service and my career: fighting for kids and families. That's been the cause of my life. And it will be the mission of my presidency. And when you go to vote in November or if you vote early, it's not just my name on the ballot. Every issue you care about, think about it because, in effect, it's on the ballot, too. It's whether or not we continue to fight climate change or we give in to denial. This is a big deal. I never thought when I gave my acceptance speech to the Democratic National Convention that I would have to put in the following sentence, 'I believe in science.' Climate change is real. It's serious. And we have to be united and committed in addressing it. I never thought I'd hear someone running for president, my opponent, who says he wants to appoint Supreme Court justices who would overturn marriage equality and turn the clock back on LGBT Americans, overturn a woman's right to make her own healthcare decisions and reverse that fundamental right and so much more. So there's a lot at stake. And that's why some of the analysts are saying more Americans will vote in this election than ever before. We had more people watching that debate than any presidential debate before. And that's why we have to focus on what we want to do because I want to make a difference in your lives. And one of the biggest issues that I heard about throughout the campaign that I hear about from every corner of our country is how much an education costs. Bernie is absolutely right. I remember when I went to college, my dad, who was a small business man ... he had saved up money, but I had to work. I had to work through college, work during the school year, work during summers, but that was okay. We were able to put it together. It wasn't so much that it endangered me or my family's financial future. And then I decided to go to law school, and my dad said, 'Well, I can't help you. That ... we're done. We can't help you.' So I kept working. I got a small scholarship, but then I took out loans. And I paid those loans back. But I was lucky because I signed up for a program that gave me the opportunity to pay my loans back as a percentage of my in-come, not a fixed interest rate. That's why I could go to work for the Children's Defense Fund. I think I made $14,000 a year, as I recall. I could never have done that if I had had the kind of interest rates that so many young people now are facing. It's absolutely wrong, and it has undermined the fundamental right to pursue your dreams, to have that education, to get those opportunities that you so rightly deserve. Now, New Hampshire has the highest proportion of students with debt in the country and the second-highest average debt per student. As a student I met here in New Hampshire said, going to college should be hard, but paying for college shouldn't be so hard that it prevents you from getting your education. Indeed, here in New Hampshire, we've got so many young people graduating with debt who aren't able to get started in their careers, aren't able to do the jobs like I could do, because they have to get a job that pays as much as possible to begin paying their debt down. So we should, and we will, make public colleges tuition-free for families earning less than $125,000 a year. And if you already have student debt, like so many students have here in New Hamp-shire, we will help you refinance it. It is absolutely outrageous that you cannot refinance student debt, and it is even worse that you're being charged interest rates that are so much higher than anything that anybody else is paying to buy a house, to buy a car, to borrow money for a business. I don't know how we got to where we are, but we are going to fix it. This is wrong. It's wrong for students, it's wrong for families, and it's wrong for our country. I also have met a lot of young people who want to start a business. They want to be entrepreneurs. It's the classic American story; start that business in the garage or the basement; get going. But they can't get credit because they have student debt. Nobody will help them out, no matter how good the idea is. So we're going to put a moratorium, so you don't have to pay your student debt back for a couple of years while you try to get your business started, and you get the chance to get the credit you need. We are also ... we are also going to provide loan forgiveness for people willing to go into public service or national service. And in Florida on Friday I'll give a speech about why that is so important. Now, when you add it up, our plan will help millions of people save thousands of dollars. Our campaign has built a tool to help you see how our college plan will actually help you, not in general, but really specifically you, the situation you're in. To check it out, go to hillaryclinton.com/calculator. Now, we have an example right here, and this presentation is what you can see when you go to our website. You can say, 'I have student debt,' you can say, 'I am planning for college,' you can put in what your annual household income is, how much you will save, and we are trying to make it as specific as possible because I don't want anybody to miss out on what this plan can do for you. You can choose whether you have student debt. I met a young woman just yesterday in North Carolina who said, 'Nobody really ex-plained to me and my family what I was getting into.' I hear that so much. You know, these financial aid forms, one is called FAFSA, it takes forever to fill out, and at the end of it you really don't know what it means? Well, we're going to be really explicit. You know, we do have technology in America. And we ought to use it more to help people understand what they're getting into and to provide alternatives so that they don't make the wrong decisions for themselves. So, please, use this, you know? You will save $60,640 if you're in one of these categories. But there is a way to understand the choices you have to make for everybody. So I hope you will go to hillaryclinton.com/calculator. But I have to say this: none of this will happen if you all don't turn out and vote. None of it. You know, I see all the signs saying, 'I will vote.' There is also a website. Please go to iwillvote.com to make sure you're registered. All the information is there. You put in your name, you put in your address, and through the miracle of technology you can find out if you're registered, or maybe because you moved you were purged from the records and you have to register again. New Hampshire makes it easy. You can have same-day registration. So both Bernie and I are excited about what we can do together. I am really looking forward to working with him and other strong Democrats and Republicans who want to help solve problems again in America. Bringing people together is what I'm going to spend a lot of my time doing as your president. And if you've had a chance to see or meet my running mate, Tim Kaine, you know how hard he'll work to get things done and make it a high priority to produce results. So we're going to move now to the panel, and I'm very pleased to have Mary Jo Brown moderating, along with Doug Martin, who you heard from earlier. I know they have collected up questions from the crowd. But I will end by saying that I'm excited about what we can do to make college affordable, and especially as Bernie rightly said, open the doors to families and young people who have been left out. We also want to make Pell grants once again available year-round, and we want to make sure that we have ... specific help for certain groups of students. I'll end with this story. I taught at the University of Arkansas Law School some years ago, and I met a lot of students, not only in the law school but students on campus. I'd go and eat with them and go to events with them, and I met a lot of students who scraped together the tuition money, but then something happened. You know, maybe they were already parents and their childcare fell apart. Maybe they had to drive to and from school; they lived out in the country and their old car finally broke down and there was no public transportation. Or maybe they had a health emergency. And they would come and they would say to me, 'What can I do? Where can I get the $300 to fix the car? Where can I find childcare? How can I pay the doctor's bills?' And I realized that we've got to take care of tuition, making sure that you can go and be able to start and finish school. We've got to make sure costs and expenses, Pell grants and other ways of helping. But we also have to fill the gaps that exist for a lot of students. So I helped to start something called the Arkansas Single-Parent Scholarship Fund, because the people who had the most unexpected expenses were young parents, mostly, but not always, single moms, young, divorced, pretty much on their own, trying to improve their lives and prospects. And we started a fund to help fill those gaps, and, you know, we did it over so many years now, about 35 years, and we've helped thousands of people, so they didn't have to drop out. They didn't have to cut back. That's what I want for our country again, where we're helping each other, where we're reaching out and giving everybody a chance, and, yes, sometimes a second or third chance, to make the most of their lives, to pursue their dreams. I think the American dream is big enough for everybody, and education is absolutely essential to it.  So please make sure you come out and vote in this election. Thank you, all." You know, earlier tonight, Al reminded me that when the first Al Smith ran for presi-dent, he chose as his running mate the progressive senator from Arkansas, Joseph T. Robinson, who was one of my husband's political heroes. This work that you do through the dinner ... Al, you've done it now for 30 ... 30 years ... is such a labor of love. You've been a hero for both the children of the archdiocese and for the city of New York. And I think we all owe Al Smith a great, great round of applause. This is such a special event that I took a break from my rigorous nap schedule to be here. And as you've already heard, it's a treat for all of you too, because usually I charge a lot for speeches like this. But, for me, it was kind of ironic thinking about a fiery populist, Al Smith. If he were here today and saw how much money we've raised for needy children, he'd be very proud. And if he saw this magnificent room, full of plutocrats celebrating his legacy, he'd be very confused. It's a special honor to be here with Your Eminence. Now I know, Your Eminence, you were criticized for inviting both Donald and me here tonight, and you responded by saying "If I only sat down with those who were saints, I'd be taking all my meals alone." Now, just to be clear, I think the Cardinal is saying I'm not eligible for sainthood. But getting through these three debates with Donald has to count as a miracle. So I guess I'm up against the highest, hardest stained-glass ceiling. But, Your Eminence, you deserve great credit for bringing together two people who've been at each other's throats ... mortal enemies, bitter foes; I've got to ask, how did you get the governor and mayor here together tonight? Now, I've got to say, there are a lot of friendly faces here in this room; people that I've been privileged to know and to work with. I just want to put you all in a basket of adorables. And you look so good in your tuxes; or, as I refer to them, formal pantsuits. And, you know, because this is a friendly dinner for such a great cause; Donald, if at any time, you don't like what I'm saying feel free to stand up and shout "Wrong!" while I'm talking. You know, come to think of it, it's amazing I'm up here after Donald. I didn't think he'd be okay with a peaceful transition of power. And, Donald, after listening to your speech, I will also enjoy listening to Mike Pence deny that you ever gave it. You know, I've had the privilege of being at the Al Smith dinners in years past and I always enjoy it. But, remember, if you're not happy with the way it comes out, it must be rigged. And it's always a special treat for me to be back in New York; a city that I love and which I think truly embodies the best of America. You know ... don't you think? People look at the Statue of Liberty and they see a proud symbol of our history as a nation of immigrants, a beacon of hope for people around the world. Donald looks at the Statue of Liberty and sees a "four." Maybe a "five" if she loses the torch and tablet and changes her hair. You know, come to think of it, you know what would be a good number for a woman? Forty-five. But I digress. Now, I'm going to try my best tonight, but I understand I am not known for my sense of humor. That's why it did take a village to write these jokes. People say ... and I hear them, I know ... they say I'm boring compared to Donald. But I'm not boring at all. In fact, I'm the life of every party I attend and I've been to three. And when the parties get out of hand, as occasionally they do, it's important to have a responsible chaperone who can get everyone home safely. And that is why I picked Tim Kaine to be my Vice President. Now, you notice there is no teleprompter here tonight, which is probably smart, because maybe you saw Donald dismantle his prompter the other day. And I get that. They're hard to keep up with, and I'm sure it's even harder when you're translating from the original Russian. But every year, this dinner brings together a collection of sensible, committed, main-stream Republicans ... or, as we now like to call them ... Hillary supporters. Now, some of my critics ... and I hear that too ...   They think I only say what people want to hear. Well, tonight, that is true. And here's exactly what you want to hear ... this election will be over very, very soon. And look at this dais ... we've got Charlie Rose, and Maria Bartiromo, and Chris Mat-thews, and Gayle King, and Norah O'Donnell, and Katie Couric ... this counts as a press conference, right? It is great, also, to see Mayor Bloomberg here. It's a shame he's not speaking tonight. I'm curious to hear what a billionaire has to say. And look at the dais ... we've got the Honorable Chuck Schumer, the Honorable Andrew Cuomo, the Honorable Mike Bloomberg, the Honorable Bill DeBlasio, the Honorable Dave Dinkins, and so many other wonderful elected officials. And we have Rudy Giuliani. Now, many don't know this, but Rudy actually got his start as a prosecutor going after wealthy New Yorkers who avoided paying taxes. But, as the saying goes, "If you can't beat them, go on Fox News and call them a genius." So as I've said, we've now had our third and, thankfully, final debate. Sharing a stage with Donald Trump is like, well, nothing really comes to mind. There is nothing like sharing a stage with Donald Trump. Donald wanted me drug tested before last night's debate. And look, I've got to tell you, I am so flattered that Donald thought I used some sort of performance enhancer. Now, actually, I did. It's called preparation. And looking back, I've had to listen to Donald for three full debates. And he says I don't have any stamina. That is four and a half hours. I have now stood next to Donald Trump longer than any of his campaign managers. Now, look, I have deep respect for people like Kellyanne Conway. She's working day and night for Donald and because she's a contractor, he's probably not even going to pay her. But I think the good news is that the debates finally allowed Republicans to unite around their candidate. The bad news is, it's Mike Pence. And it's been a long, long campaign. That should be one of our highest priorities, shortening the campaigns. And whoever wins this election, the outcome will be historic. We'll either have the first female president or the first president who started a Twitter war with Cher. And if Donald does win, it will be awkward at the annual President's Day photo, when all the former presidents gather at the White House, and not just with Bill. How is Barack going to get past the Muslim ban? Now, Republicans in particular seem frustrated with their nominee. Paul Ryan told the Republican members of the House, you ... you don't have to support the top of the ticket. Don't worry about anyone besides yourself. Just do what's in your own best interests. So I guess Donald really has unified his party around his core philosophy. And I don't understand their unhappiness. They say Donald doesn't have any policies. He has no policies. I keep hearing that. I'd actually like to defend him on this. Donald has issues, serious issues. Really, really serious issues. And I worry about Donald's go it alone attitude. For example, at his convention, when he said I alone can fix it, you know, in the '90s, I said the same thing about America's health care system and it didn't work out so well for me, either. But speaking of health, Donald has been very concerned about mine, very concerned. He actually sent a car to bring me here tonight. Actually, it was a hearse. But I ... but I kind of want to just put the information out there, so everybody can draw their own conclusions and you can judge our relative health. We've each released our medical records. My blood pressure is 100/70. His is unbelievably great. My cholesterol is 189, his is presidential. My heart rate is 72 beats per minute, his is the most beats ever, or the least beats ever, whichever sounds best. But Donald really is as healthy as a horse, you know, the one Vladimir Putin rides around on. But ... but I can say without fear of contradiction tonight, that I will be the healthiest and youngest woman ever to serve as president. But this has really been a strange campaign. You saw it last night. You saw it again tonight. Donald has attacked me for a life in public service and I didn't get that at first. I kind of get it now. As he told Howard Stern, he doesn't like it when women have been around for more than 35 years. But Donald, we have so much more in common than, actually, you may realize. For example, I tried to inspire young people by showing them that with resilience and hard work anything is possible and you're doing the same. A third grade teacher told me that one of her students refused to turn in his homework because it was under audit. And here's another similarity. The Republican National Committee isn't spending a dime to help either one of us. So tonight, let's embrace the spirit of the evening. Let's come together. Remember what unites us and just rip on Ted Cruz. I hope you enjoyed my remarks tonight. I said no to some jokes that I thought were over the line. But I suppose you can judge for yourself on Wikileaks in the next few days. Donald will tell us after the benediction whether he accepts that this dinner is over. He has to wait and see.  But there's nothing funny about the stakes in this election. In the end what makes this dinner important are not the jokes we tell but the legacy that we carry forward. It is often easy to forget how far this country has come. And there are a lot of people in this room tonight who themselves, or their parents or grandparents, came here as immigrants, made a life for yourselves, took advantage of the American dream and the greatest system that has ever been created in the history of the world to unleash the individual talents and energy and ambition of everyone willing to work hard. And when I think about what Al Smith went through it's important to just reflect how groundbreaking it was for him, a Catholic, to be my party's nominee for president. Don't forget ... school boards sent home letters with children saying that if Al Smith is elected president you will not be allowed to have or read a Bible. Voters were told that he would annul Protestant marriages. And I saw a story recently that said people even claimed the Holland Tunnel was a se-cret passageway to connect Rome and America, to help the Pope rule our country. Those appeals, appeals to fear and division, can cause us to treat each other as the Other. Rhetoric like that makes it harder for us to see each other, to respect each other, to listen to each other. And certainly a lot harder to love our neighbor as ourselves. I believe how we treat others is the highest expression of faith and of service. I'm not Catholic. I'm a Methodist, but one of the things that we share is the belief that in order to achieve salvation we need both faith and good works. And you certainly don't need to be Catholic to be inspired by the humility and heart of the Holy Father, Pope Francis. Or to embrace his message. His message about rejecting a mindset of hostility, his calls to reduce inequality, his warnings about climate change, his appeal that we build bridges, not walls. Now as you may know, my running mate, Tim, is Catholic and went to Jesuit schools, and one of the things he and I have talked about is this idea from the Jesuits of the Magis, the more, the better. But we need to get better at finding ways to disagree on matters of policy while agreeing on questions of decency and civility. How we talk to each other, treat each other, respect each other. So I've taken this concept of Magis to heart in this campaign, as best as one can in the daily heat, the back and forth of a presidential campaign, to ask how we can do more for each other, and better for each other. Because I believe that for each of us, our greatest monument on this earth won't be what we build, but the lives we touch. And that is ultimately what this dinner is all about. And it's why it's been such a great honor to join you all again. Thank you." I am so excited about being here. Thank you, all for this really warm, wonderful welcome. And I thank, on behalf of all of us I want to thank Alicia Machado for that introduction and for sharing her story with us. Alicia will be voting for the very first time in this election, and I am very grateful for her support. I'm also delighted that we're joined today by your great senator Bill Nelson and his wife Grace. I also want to thank Representative Amanda Hickman from the Florida State House, Michael Cox, chairman of the Greater Pasco Chamber of Commerce, Michael Ledbetter, who is the Pasco County Democratic executive committee chair and his wife Beverly. And thanks to retired Colonel Wilson Elton [ And thanks to all the elected officials here. And I especially want to thank all of you for not just joining us but helping us to get out the vote in this last week! It's almost hard to believe, isn't it? There are only seven days left in this election. So are you ready to vote? Are you ready to volunteer these last seven days? I hope too that you ready to elect Patrick Murphy to the United States Senate! Patrick, who's been in Congress, will be an independent voice for Florida families. And I am so excited to think about what he could do, because unlike his opponent, he's never been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump. Now somebody asked me the other day, 'Why do you keep coming back to Florida?' Just look around folks. I mean it is a beautiful, and I have lots of friends, but it's also really important in this election. Florida can decide who our next president is, which will affect the nation and the world. And I want to make sure that every voter in Florida spends these next seven days thinking about what's at stake in this election. Because honestly I believe this may be the most important election of our lifetimes. One week from today, we will be choosing our next president and commander-in-chief of the United States. I don't think the choice could be any clearer. I have spent my career fighting for children and families. I have served in the United States Senate, served on the Senate Armed Services Committee. I was in the Situation Room when we brought Osama Bin Laden to justice. I represented you as your secretary of state, going to 112 countries, negotiating with friend and foe alike. I am ready to serve if you give me the great honor of being your president. Now, I do have to say that I think that stands in contrast to my opponent. And maybe for you if you think about all of the issues that separate Donald Trump from me, it could be his dangerous statements about nuclear weapons. When a journalist told Donald Trump that people were worried about how casually he talks about using nuclear weapons, he said, 'Well then why are we making them?' And I have to tell you yesterday I was in Ohio, and I was introduced by a gentleman who was one of our officers in charge of launching nuclear weapons if the order ever came from our president. And what he told the crowd ... it was a big crowd at Kent State University ... I think every voter should hear. Basically ... his name was Bruce Blair ... he said that, having had the responsibility of sitting in a bunker, being responsible for the codes and the keys to our nuclear weapons, he knows that when a president makes the order to launch a nuclear attack, there is no appeal. There is no veto. And that is why he has joined with dozens of former Air Force officers to send a letter to say, 'We need a president with the temperament, the steadiness, the calmness to be in charge of nuclear weapons.' And therefore they cannot support Donald Trump, because he does not have the temperament to be our commander-in-chief and handle those responsibilities. So when you think about voting, early this week, voting next Tuesday, responsibility for our nuclear weapons is on the ballot. So is immigration. Do we want to round up millions of people who are here working, raising their families, as he has suggested he will do? I don't think so. I think what we want is to bring them out of the shadows so that they can't be exploited by employers like Donald Trump, who refused to hire Americans and hired undocumented workers so he could pay them less. I don't think that's right. Now maybe for some of you, what Donald Trump said about prisoners of war will be enough reason to vote against him, somebody who questioned the patriotism and the service of John McCain because he was a prison of war. We need a Commander in Chief who respects the service and sacrifice of the men and women who wear our uniform. Or maybe for some of you, it's what he said about a judge born in Indiana, who just happened to be assigned the case brought by people who were defrauded by the phony Trump University. And so Trump said, 'Well, we can't trust him because his parents were born in Mexico.' Now Paul Ryan, the Republican Speaker of the House, called ... well, but wait a minute, ... he called what Trump said about that distinguished federal judge, 'The definition of a racist comment.' And then Trump went on to attack a Gold Star family whose son, Captain Khan, died defending our country, simply because that family was Muslim. And then let's not forget, Trump spent years, years insisting that President Obama was not born in the United States, even after the birth certificate was produced. Honestly if this were something new, I think we'd all be asking ourselves, 'Well, what does he have against President Obama?' Or what does he have against me? But this is not new. I know I'm reaching out to Republicans and Independents as well as Democrats because I want to be the president for all Americans. And here's what I want you to tell. I want you to tell your Republican friends, in 1987 Donald Trump took out a Donald Trump took out a $100,000 ad in the New York Times to criticize President Reagan. He said, 'Our leaders are the laughing stock of the world.' So this is a man who thinks that he is better than President Reagan, better than President Obama ... literally better than anybody, I guess. And, when you think about it, what he said at the convention, 'I alone can fix it,' runs counter to who we are as Americans. We work together. So there are many reasons why I think it is fair to conclude that Donald Trump is unqualified and unfit to be president. But today, I want to just spend a few minutes focusing in particular about what he has said and what he has done to woman and girls because ... Any of you see the debates? I stood next to Donald for four and a half hours during those three debates, proving conclusively I have the stamina to be President of the United States. And during those debates, Donald always used to say, 'What have you been doing for 30 years?' And I always found that kind of odd, because he could Google it and find out. And so I've been a lawyer, and I've been a first lady, and I've been a senator, and I've been Secretary of State, and I've been a wife and a mother and a grandmother and a friend and a churchgoer, and for my entire life I've been a woman. And when I think about what we now know about Donald Trump and what he's been doing for 30 years, he sure has spent a lot of time demeaning, degrading, insulting, and assaulting women. And, I've got to tell you, some of what we've learned ... some of this stuff is very upsetting. I would, frankly, rather be here talking about nearly anything else, like how we're going to create good jobs and get the economy working for everybody, not just those at the top. How we're going to make college affordable for every single family, because I have a plan that if your family makes less than $125,000, you will not pay tuition to go to a state college or university. And if you're above that, it will be debt free, and we will help you pay back the debt you already have so you can get out from under it. But I can't just talk about all of the good things we want to do, because people are making up their minds. This is a consequential choice, so we've got to talk about something that, frankly, is painful, because it matters. We can't just wish it away. And a lot of his supporters don't like to hear this. I don't blame them. If I were supporting him, I wouldn't want to hear it either, to be honest. But I've got to tell you, I learned way back in elementary school and I learned it in Sunday school: it's not okay to insult people. It's not okay. And look at what he does. He calls women 'ugly,' 'disgusting,' 'nasty' all the time. He calls women 'pigs,' rates bodies on a scale from 1 to 10. We just heard from Alicia. She was Miss Universe when Donald Trump owned the pageant. Well, he said she put on some weight and it made him angry, so he called her 'Miss Piggy.' He called her 'Miss Housekeeping' because she's a beautiful Latina. He brought a bunch of reporters to a gym to watch him order her around to exercise. Now, he also said, 'This is somebody who likes to eat.' Well, I have to say: who doesn't like to eat? I mean, really, can we just stop for a minute and reflect on the absurdity of Donald Trump finding fault with Miss Universe? But you've got to ask: why does he do these things? Who acts like this? And, I'll tell you who: a bully, that's who. And thankfully, Alicia refuses to let such a small person get her down. She knows that Donald Trump doesn't get to decide her value in her eyes and in the eyes of her family and her friends. But what about our girls? What about girls watching all this? What happens to their confidence, their sense of self-worth? If you've got a daughter, a granddaughter, a sister, a mother, a wife, a good friend, someone like this becoming president who insults more than half the population of the United States of America? And what about our boys? This is not someone we want them looking up to. Not so long ago, I was the mother of a teenage girl. And every day I tried to make sure that she knew she was smart and she was capable, and I'm doing the same thing with my granddaughter and my grandson. Because, let's be honest here, the world has a way of telling our girls exactly the opposite ... they don't look right, they're not thin enough, they don't act right, no one will like them unless they change their clothes or straighten their hair or stop being bossy, or whatever the criticism might be. Right? And I remember, when Chelsea was a teenager, I would wait on the second floor of the White House in the long hall that's there for her to come home from school. And sometimes, we only had a few minutes together. But before she'd run off to talk to her friends or do whatever she was planning to, I would figure out how was the day. We'd talk about what was on her mind. And that time together was really valuable to me as a parent, because we parents, and I know there are a lot of parents here today, we work hard to give our kids a sense of confidence to send them out into the world believing in their own value, and it really is important that we don't let anybody take that away from them. And we want them to be strong, and we don't want them to feel bad about themselves. And we've got to work hard to make sure our boys, just like our girls, have that same sense of positive energy: not negative, not tearing people down ... lifting people up and respecting women. In fact, all of us should respect each other in our country. So, when I look at my granddaughter and my grandson, I am on the same mission. I want them to know they're love, they're cared for, they're respected. I want them to develop a good work ethic. I believe in hard work, and I want them to go out and prove themselves in the world. But that's what I want for every child. I have spent my life doing everything I could to help kids and families. It will be the mission of my presidency. I will get up every day in the White House trying to figure out: how can we knock down the barriers, overcome the challenges so that people living here in Pasco County can get ahead and stay ahead? So I know there's work to be done. We can't do it with just words alone. We've got to do more to stop treatment about women being somehow objectified. And, oh my gosh, when we heard that tape and we heard what he does to women. I'm not going to repeat it. But you know what Donald Trump was bragging about: grabbing women, mistreating women. And I have to tell you, since that tape came out, twelve women have come to say that, 'What he said on that tape is what he did to me.' And then we heard his response. What he does at his rallies is to go after those women all over again, insulting them. He said he couldn't possibly have said those things because the women weren't attractive enough to assault. 'Look at her,' he said about one woman. 'I don't think so.' About another, he said, 'She wouldn't be my first choice.' He's also on tape bragging with the radio personality Howard Stern about how he used to go backstage at beauty pageants to barge in on the women while they were getting dressed. He said he did that ... he said he did that to 'inspect' them. That was his word ... and he said, 'I sort of get away with things like that.' And sure enough, contestants have come forward to say, 'Yes, that's exactly what he did to us.' Now, as bad as that is, he didn't just do it at the Miss USA pageant or the Miss Universe pageant. He's also been accused of doing it at the Miss Teen USA pageant. Contestants say that Donald Trump came in to look at them when they were changing. Some of them were just 15 years old. We cannot hide from this. We've got to be willing to face it. This man wants to be president of the United States of America and our First Lady, Michelle Obama, spoke for many of us when she said Donald Trump's words have shaken her to her core. For a lot of women who have gone through something like this in your lives, that's brought back painful memories. And for men who would never, ever talk or act like Donald, it's been shocking to see this. He tried to explain it away as 'locker room talk,' well, I'll tell you what, a lot of professional athletes stood up and said, 'Not in our locker rooms. That does not happen.' Well, I guess the bottom line is he thinks belittling women makes him a bigger man. And I don't think there's a woman anywhere who doesn't know what that feels like. He doesn't look at us and see full human beings, with our dreams and purposes, our own capabilities. And he has shown us that clearly throughout this campaign. Well, he's very wrong. He is wrong about both the women and the men of this country. He has shown us who he is. Let us on Tuesday show him who we are. We can stand up for what we believe, what we want for our children and grandchildren, what we know is right. And you can go down the list of everything he has said. He doesn't believe in equal pay, he thinks pregnancy is an inconvenience, he won't raise the minimum wage, and he said if he comes home and dinner is not on the table, he gets angry. Instead of supporting women who are out there supporting their families, he wants to make it even harder. Well, I have a message for him. We're going to fight for affordable childcare. We're going to fight for equal pay for all people. We're going to fight for paid family leave, we're going to fight to make sure everybody gets raising wages in America and that's important because so many people still struggling, still working hard, raising a family, having a hard time getting all of their bills paid. And that's especially true for minimum wage workers ... who ... two-thirds of whom are women, so we've got work to do my friends. I'm excited because I know we can do this and I will stand up and I will fight for you, I will work for you, I will give my heart to this mission of making our country all it should be. Because instead of Donald Trump's dangerous and divisive vision, mine is positive, optimistic, hopeful and unifying. But I can't do any of this without your help. Early voting has already begun. Almost 26 millions Americans have already voted and that includes four million right here in Florida. Americans are voting for the kind of better future we can make together. And voting on all the issues that they care about. It may be my name and Donald's name on the ballot but everything you care about, our security, our economy, bringing our country together, the environment, clean water and clean air! Here in Dade City, you can vote every day from now until November 5th, from 7am to 7pm. In fact, right now, the East Pasco Government Center is just a few minutes' drive away. You can go there right after this rally and vote. Because, we need everybody to stand up in this election. And if you have a mail-in ballot at home, send it in when you get home today. Don't wait to send it back! Talk friends and family and neighbors and co-workers. Donald Trump's strategy is pretty simple... he said he wants to suppress young people from voting women from voting, people of color from voting, that is a lot of people. By showing up with the biggest turnout ever we will show him and everybody a message that that is not who we are. Now I know here in this county and this larger region, you probably know some people who are going to vote for Trump. And here is what I want to ask you, I want you to talk with them. Ask them what they care about. Ask them what kind of future they want for their economy. Because Donald Trump's economic plan is slashing taxes on the wealthy and big corporations. I have said that I want the wealthy to pay their fair share and I will not raise taxes on anybody making less than $250,000 a year. So there could not be, no matter what you care about, a bigger difference between me and Donald Trump, and I hope that you will come out and volunteer for these last seven days. We are signing up for volunteer shifts making calls, knocking on doors, it really matters, turn out matters. Please go to hillaryclinton.com to see how you can get involved. Here is what I want to leave you with. You know, I feel like so many of you, our country is already great but we can make is greater. The main reason America is great is because America is good. We are a big hearted, generous people. Not a small minded people. We know that if everybody works together we will get farther together than if we separate people, we push them down, we engage in all the negativity that we have heard too much in this campaign. But sometimes, the fate of even the greatest nations lie in the balance. For America, this is one of those make or break elections. It really is in your hands. I hope you will think about how you will feel the day after the election on November 9th. are we going to more forward together or are we going to move backwards by someone who wants to bully us? And I hope, I hope you will think about how together we can make a difference, I want to be your partner as well as your president, I want us to create the best possible future for our children and our grandchildren. That is what I will work my heart out to do and I hope you will help me to make a better, fairer, stronger America. Where we prove once and for all that love trumps hate! Thank you all. I am so excited to be here, what a time to be back in Cleveland. The Indians are going to the World Series. That is after the Cavs won the championship. What a year for Cleveland, you really are "Believe Land." Now I, for one, am hoping for a Great Lakes series, I spent a lot of days at Wrigley field as a kid, so that would be a dream come true for me, to have Cleveland and Chicago in World Series, and for us to win Ohio. I want to thank all of the people who are here today because you've heard from some great, great folks. I want to thank Governor Ted Strickland, our candidate to the United States Senate. I'll tell you, we could really use a Democratic senate to get things done for the people of Ohio and America. I wanna thank Mayor Frank Jackson, County Executive, Armond Budish. I wanna thank my great friend from Youngstown, Congressman Tim Ryan. And we need you all in. We need you all in. You're rallying together and we need to rally together because you know, I really believe we are stronger together! Anybody watch the debate Wednesday night? Well, that was the third and last time. That I will ever have to debate Donald Trump. I have now spent four and a half hours on stage with Donald, proving once again, I have the stamina to be president and commander in chief. Really, you -- you just have to be a good cheer when you find yourself in situations like that. And because I love this country and I believe in the American people, I could feel so clear in my own mind and my heart about what we can do together. So no matter what he was saying, I just kept thinking of all the people that I have met throughout this campaign. And I had the chance to talk about some of the most important concerns on people's minds, what keeps you up at night. And as I said then and as I have said continuously, we're going to invest in the middle class. We're going to invest in you and your families. We're going to make sure we produce enough good jobs with rising incomes that every single person, especially every single young American here today, will have the chance to go as far as your talents and your hard work will take you.  And we're also going to protect our children from gun violence. We are not going to tolerate the kind of gun violence epidemic that has swept this country and results in the deaths of 33,000 people a year. We can come together to meet our challenges, no matter what they are. But on Wednesday night, Donald Trump did something no other presidential nominee has ever done. He refused to say that he would respect the results of this election. Now, make no mistake. By doing that, he is threatening our democracy. He is basically saying hey, we've been around 240 years and we've always had peaceful transitions no matter who won or who lost. Look, if you lose an election -- I've lost elections, you don't feel very good the next day, do you? But we know in our country the difference between leadership and dictatorship, right? And the peaceful transition -- the peaceful transition of power is one of the things that sets us apart. It's how we hold our country together no matter who's in charge. You know, I went to 112 countries as your secretary of state and I -- I saw the difference between what we do and what others do, I was in countries where people jail their political opponents or execute them or exile them. Or invalidate elections that they didn't win. That can never be allowed to happen here. I believe that's true no matter who you support in this election, whether or not you support me. Or you support my opponent, together, we must support American democracy and the country that has given every one of us so many opportunities. And the best way to do that, my friends, is to turn out and vote. [ Those are great. That is great. I'm excited because we are well on our way, there is an inspiring story being written right now by people across America, and many of you are getting involved in this election, some of you for the first time in your lives. We now have in America more than 200 million registered voters. That is more than we have ever had in our entire history, and that is really good news for our democracy. More than 50 million millennials have registered. You know what that means? Young people will determine the outcome of this election, which I think is good news. That means our future is in good hands. And listen to this, because this is really exciting. More than 4 million people have already voted. Including many people right here in Ohio. In fact, in the first four days of in-person early voting here in Ohio, more people showed up to vote than they did at the same time in 2012, in our last election. That is fantastic and it shows how serious people are taking this election. So numbers like that remind us that no matter all the negativity that's out there, there is something really exciting happening right now. People are coming together. Democrats, Republicans, independents, all of us to reject hate and division. People are motivated to vote early, to defend core American values, to embrace a future where every person counts, everyone has a place, and everyone can contribute. That is my vision. I have a hopeful, optimistic, unifying vision for what our country will be. Because from the beginning, our campaign has been focused on ideas, not insults, on bringing people together, not tearing us apart. And I want all of you to know that that is true not only for the campaign, but if I am fortunate enough to be your president, I want you to know, and I want you to tell anybody you know, any friends, or colleagues at school or work, or your neighborhood who may be planning to support the other guy, here is what I want you to tell them. I want you to tell them that I want to be their president. I want to be every single American's president, whether you agree or disagree, whether you vote for me or against me. I believe we can disagree without being disagreeable. I believe that. And I have seen that happen. I want to be a good listener. I know there are a lot of people here in Ohio who are discouraged, frustrated, even angry about what is going on in their lives, about losing jobs, they are upset about what they see happening around them. I get that. But I think anger is not a plan. We need plans that will help us deal with the legitimate concerns and questions that people have here in Ohio. I think that is what the country needs now. And that is what I will try to offer. CLINTON: I am not going to pretend that we can just snap our fingers and solve our problems. That would not be fair. It wouldn't be true. But I know we can make progress together and you deserve something to vote for, not just against. So I want to speak directly to the challenges that a lot of people here in Ohio face, especially when it comes to our economy. You see I believe really simply that when the middle class thrives, America thrives. When we build the economy from the middle out and the ground up, not from the top down, we are more likely to provide better lives, better incomes, better opportunities for more Americans. My opponent has a different perspective. He really believes if you give trillions, that's with a T, trillions in tax cuts to the wealthy, to millionaires and billionaires and corporations, everything will work out. It's really trickle down on steroids. I believe differently that we must invest in working families in the middle class, in small businesses, that will power the economy. And that's what we're going to do. We're going to get the economy to work for everyone, not just those at the top who have done pretty well over the last years. Now Donald likes to say he's on the side of American workers but his actions tell a different story. He has been buying cheap Chinese steel and aluminum for his construction projects when he should be buying good American made steel that supports good American jobs. And this is a very important issue here in Ohio because you're one of the largest steel producing states in America so you understand how important this is to support the American steel industry so I'm going to let Donald try to explain himself to the steel workers filing for unemployment. He has put Chinese steel workers to work, not American steel workers and we're going to change that. And for all of his talk about putting America first, he's made his products in at least 12 other countries. Trump's suits were made in Mexico. They could have been made in Brooklyn, Ohio. Trump's furniture is made in Turkey and it could have been made in Cleveland. Trump barware is made in Slovenia instead of Toledo. So if he wants to make America great again, why doesn't he start by making things in America again? And we also know that he hasn't paid a dime in federal income tax for years. He says that makes him smart. Well, I don't know how smart you have to be to lose $1 billion in a year in the first place. But what that means is everybody else here, all of us, have paid more in federal income taxes than a billionaire, right? And that means he's contributed zero, zero for our military or our vets, zero for Pell grants to help young people go to college, zero for our highways or investing in clean energy or other ways to help us with new jobs for the future. Now Tim Kaine and I, we have a different view. We want to make the biggest investment in new jobs since World War II. Jobs in infrastructure and manufacturing, clean energy, technology and small business. We are going to make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century. And I've set some big goals. I want us to deploy a half a billion more solar panels by the end of my first term. And enough clean energy to power every home within 10 years. We're also going to strengthen education at every level starting with universal pre-kindergarten education. And we want good schools with good teachers in every zip code so that every kid gets a world class education. I want us to bring back technical education in high school. I think it was a mistake when we took it out of our high schools. And let's remember, it's at community colleges like this that thousands and thousands of people in our country, of all ages, get such a good start. And I'm going to make public colleges and universities tuition free for any families making less than $125,000 a year. Education should lift you up, not hold you back. And we're going to help you, we're going to help you pay back and pay down your loans. Too many young people are burdened by those debts. It's going to be great to help you pay it back as a percentage of your income, so you're never on the hook for more than you can afford. Senator Bernie Sanders and I worked on this plan together. It's going to help save millions of people thousands of dollars, and you can actually go to HillaryClinton.com/calculator to see how much money you and your family could save with our plan. I also want to do more for apprenticeship programs. I thank all the unions represented here for the great apprentice programs that you have in place. Thank you. I want to support apprenticeship programs and skills trainings with business and labor unions, because there are going to be good jobs out there for welders, and machinists, and health technicians, and computer coders, and so much more. I want everybody to have the chance to get your piece of the American dream, and I think the American dream is big enough for everybody. And we're going to raise the national minimum wage because no one who works full-time should still be in poverty. As I said in the debate the other night, I want to make sure that we take care of people on Social Security who were low-income workers and women, particularly widows, who lose have of their monthly payment when their husbands die. We've got to do more to make sure Social Security provides a decent income for our seniors. And, yes, don't you think it's finally time to guarantee equal pay for women's work? Now the equal pay issue is important in and of itself because, if you've got a mother or a wife or a daughter or a sister who's working, you want her to be paid fairly. I mean that's good for the entire family, right? But the equal pay issue gets at something even deeper. We've got to make sure that women and girls are treated with the dignity and respect in our country that they deserve. We cannot -- we cannot tolerate the kind of behavior and language we've seen from my opponent. He thinks that belittling women makes him bigger. Goes after their dignity, their self-worth, and I don't think there's a woman anywhere who doesn't know how that feels. So we're going to stand up for everybody, men and women, retirees, the young, millennials, everybody deserves to be treated with respect and dignity. And I have said repeatedly that we're going to reform the criminal justice system so that it works fairly for everyone. And we have to address systemic racism that is still too big a part of our lives together. I want to give credit to all the young people, and really people of all ages, who've been marching and speaking out, doing everything you can to make sure that issues of policing and mass incarceration, environmental justice, economic justice, educational equity, gun violence, voting rights, that they get the attention they deserve. Because it's important that we lift these issues up and work to make sure that everybody in our country feels like they are seen and they are heard. And all the advocates and activists who have challenged us to think about these issues of race and justice and equality and opportunity in new and powerful ways really deserve our appreciation. I'm going to do everything I can to lift these issues up, because one of my hopes for my presidency will be to root out systemic racism and bigotry and discrimination in whatever form it takes. So really, when you think about it, my name will be on the ballot, but it is not just me. People say, well, she has lots of plans and all of that. I do, but I also have a lot of humility about this. I really believe our country is at a turning point, that this is a crossroads election. So yes, my name may be on the ballot, but the question really is, who are we as a country? What are our values? What kind of future do we want to create together? It is so easy to get cynical about politics, believe me, I know that. But this matters so deeply to our families and our communities and our country, and indeed our world. So I want to say something to people who may be reconsidering their support for my opponent. I know you may still have questions for me. I respect that, I want to answer them, I want to earn your vote. I am reaching out to all Americans, Democrats, Republicans and independents. I think America needs every single one of us to bring our energy and our talents, our ambition to build that better country. So I hope that as we move through these next 18 days, everyone thinks seriously about what you really want to see, not just in your next president, but in your lives, in your jobs, in your education, in our future together. And the only way we can have that positive, optimistic, unifying future is if all of you help us get there. Every phone call you make, every door you knock on, every voter you register makes a big difference. So I hope you will give whatever time you can for these last days. You can go to hillaryclinton.com and sign up to volunteer. You can text "JOIN," J-O-I-N, to 47246 to join. With your help, we can elect Democrats up and down the ballot starting with Ted Strickland and others who are running. Remember that early in-person voting in Ohio began on October 12th and it ends on November 7th. So you have more of a window to vote than a lot of people in other states. And I hope you will exercise that. And I hope that you will decide whatever issue you care about, you can almost in your mind's eye see that on the ballot, see it next to my name, see it whether you care about climate change and what we are doing to protect the Great Lakes, including Lake Eerie, while creating good paying clean energy jobs. Whether you believe women should be able to make our own health care decisions. If you believe marriage equality should be protected. And that LGBT Americans should be treated equally. If you believe we should do more to stop the opioid epidemic that is destroying lives and communities. That we should do more to help with mental health and make sure that people get the treatment that they deserve.  If you believe we need to get the cost of health care, premiums, co-pays, deductibles, and prescription drug costs down. If you believe that we should have a foreign policy where we work with our allies, not insult them, and achieve common goals toward peace and prosperity. This is our chance to send a very clear, unmistakable message about what kind of country and future we want. You know, I have two of the most wonderful grandchildren ever, and I see them whenever I can, I FaceTime with them all the time. But I think about them endlessly because I feel such a sense of responsibility, not just because they're my grandchildren, obviously, and I would do anything to help them, but because I want everybody's children and grandchildren to have the same opportunities, to chart your own future, to believe in yourself, to contribute to this great America democracy of ours. To be part on an economy that lifts you up, not drags you down. I am motivated by my work that I've done my entire life on behalf of kids and families. From the time I joined the Children's Defense Fund, until today. And I will do whatever I can to make it my mission to give every single person, especially every child and young person, the chance to live up to your God-given potential. Let's go out and prove that love trumps hate. Thank you!" So we don't get a lot of chance to actually gather because we want to cover more ground together. But today was a real opportunity for us.  I just want to make two quick points. First, as we are traveling in the last 17 days, we are going to be emphasizing the importance of electing democrats down ballot.  And in particular, as I said today, we are strongly supportive of Katie Mcginty in her race for the senate. We will be, I think, meeting up with her in Philadelphia tonight. So we will have a chance to do that with her. I will be doing the same as we go from state to state, as will Tim.  The other point is today, we are making our closing arguments. We are talking about what is at stake in the election we are drawing contrasts, but we are giving people something to vote for, not just against.  And I saw where our opponent Donald Trump went to Gettysburg, one of the most extraordinary places in American history, and basically said, if he's president, he will spend his time suing women who have made charges against him based on his behavior.  Tim and I are going to keep talking about what we want to do if we are given the great honor of serving as president and vice president. As we said in the book, "Stronger To-gether" we have very specific plans.  And we are going to get together after the election and do everything possible to be prepared on January 20th to start doing the business of the American people.  What do you have to say to that?   How would you respond to that, and would that get in the way of an effort to bring the country back together, and have a mandate for the presidency?  We have close elections in America. You can go back and check that out for the last 4, 6, 8 of them. it is not unusual that the election would be close.  So we are not taking anything for granted. We are working our hearts out and covering as much ground.  We have great events planned. We have great surrogates coming out to support us that are both campaigning with us and campaigning on their own to try to convince as many people as possible to go vote.  As i said in pittsburgh, we are seeing some really encouraging signs about the turnout. the 200 million voter registration mark is huge, it's never been reached before. 50 million as the best estimate being young people is so encouraging.  And then what we are seeing from early vote returns, I think we are over 4 million already. So I am not going to speculate about the outcome of the election, people know what Tim and I want to do. We have been very clear about that. We've laid it out in every way that we could in every different kind of forum. And I am going to be reaching out to people on the other side of the aisle, to everybody that will possibly come together with us.  And how would fishers in the party impact some of those big items on your agenda, particularly immigration?  I came into the senate in 2000 as you know, and I made it clear from the beginning that I wanted work with people.  I didn't have any expectations about being treated any differently than anybody else. And I think you can go back and look at the record that I compiled by working with practically every republican I served with.  I think, last time we had it counted, 400 bills have my name on them either as a sponsor or cosponsor. You don't get that done unless you work with folks on the other side.  So I have a record of doing that, not just in the senate, but as first lady and secretary of state. And people know that. And we will begin to get to work right away and reach out to everybody that we can possibly touch to start talking about what we can do together. And I think there is a big agenda where we can find common ground.  Clinton: No I really haven't. I am a little superstitious about that. We have got a transition operation going, and I haven't really paid much attention to it yet because I want to focus on what our first task is, and that is convincing as many Americans as possible to give us the chance to serve.     I am not even going to think about responding to him anymore.  I will let the American people think about what he offers and what we offer. He can say whatever he wants and he can run his campaign however he wants to. He can go off on tangents, he can go to Gettysburg and say he's going to sue women who have made accusations against him.  I am going to keep talking about what we want to do, what we think the country de-serves from the next president and vice president. And actually when it comes right down to it, that is what I think people end up voting on. Thank you all very much.  And one other issue, there was a Wikileaks email in which one of you top aids said that a Clinton Foundation conference, that's now being labeled by some of your critics as a pay to play scheme, was a mess of your own making. Would you comment on that as well?  I have no concerns about the first question whatsoever." Wow. It is so great to be back here in Pittsburgh.  I do not think it gets any better than to be accompanied out onto the stage by Dan and Pat Rooney.  I am a big admirer of the Rooney family and I was so honored to serve with Dan when he was our ambassador to Ireland.  The Rooney family commitment to Pittsburgh is really extraordinary, and it's not just the amazing commitment to the Stealers. As special as that is, but to their roots, what they believe in, their values, and their deep concern for future generations. So I am incredibly humbled to be supported by Dan and Pat and the Rooney family. It means a great deal to both Tim and me. I also want to thank congressman Mike Doyle who is here with us. Allegheny and county executive Richard Fitzgerald who is here. Mayor Bill Peduto. Mayor John Federman. Pennsylvania attorney general Bruce Beemer. And all the other elected officials, it means a lot for you to be here with us. If all goes well in 17 days, we are looking forward to working with you on behalf of Pittsburgh. Some of you know that I have a special place in my heart for Pennsylvania, and I am excited about helping, in any way that we can, for Pittsburgh, Allegheny county, and western Pennsylvania to keep moving forward with confidence and optimism about what is possible for the future we want to create together. I am thrilled to be here with Tim Kaine. I asked him to be my running mate because I knew he would be one of the smartest, toughest, most qualified vice presidents we have ever had. And I also knew he had never lost an election. I kind of figured that might rub off on me a little bit. Now that I have gotten to spend more time with him, and with his wonderful wife Anne and their family, I am even more confident that he will be such an extraordinary leader for our country. He is not just smart, tough and qualified, Tim Kaine is as good and decent a person as you will ever meet. I am deeply honored to have him by my side in this campaign. Tim and I are excited by all of the energy and enthusiasm we are seeing across the country, and particularly here in Pennsylvania. But both of us, unlike our opponent, do not believe we can do this alone. We believe that we are going to do this by working with all of you. And that we are going to come together in the next 17 days and convince everybody you can to get out and vote because whatever issue you care about, it's going to be on the ballot. It may not be listed, but it will be on the ballot.  Whether you care about new, good jobs with a rising incomes or you care about better education or you care about what we can do to get the cost of prescription drugs down. What ever it is you care about, it is literally going to be on that ballot.  Now, my name and Tim's name may be the ones on the ballot, but we are going to be representing everything that we can do that you hope for our country. And we're going to need help doing that after the election, and that is why I hope you will do everything you can to elect Katie Mcginty, your next senator.  You know, Katie is the daughter of a Philadelphia police officer. I think she is one of 10 children, right? One of 10 children. She has devoted her professional life to protecting working families. I have known her now for more than 20 years, when she was really young, and I have seen that same can-do spirit. She just gets up every day, and asks what can she do to fight for healthier neighborhoods, to keep our kids and healthy, to fight for cleaner air and cleaner water, to help people make the most out of their own lives.  Now she is running for the senate, because like Tim and I, she believes our economy should work for everyone, not just those at the top.  Katie is exactly the kind of partner we need in the senate. But more importantly, she is exactly the kind of senator that Pittsburgh and western Pennsylvania needs in the senate. We have got to get things done for the people of Pennsylvania and America, and Katie will help us break through the gridlock, actually make a difference in people's lives, help us create more good jobs with rising incomes, guarantee equal pay for women, defending planned parenthood. And I think it is pretty clear when you look at Katie's opponent -- he still refuses to stand up to Donald Trump.  A lot of republicans have. They have had the grit to stand up and say 'he does not represent me'.  But Pat Toomey heard Donald attack a grieving gold star family who lost their son in Iraq. He heard Donald called Mexican immigrants rapists, he heard him say terrible things about women. He heard him spread the lie that our first black president wasn't really born in America -- how much more does Pat Toomey need to hear? If he doesn't have the courage to stand up to Donald Trump after all this, then can you be sure he will stand up for you when it counts against powerful interests?  So, you know, when I look at this, I'm thinking to myself, we have work to do in Washington. And I know it's not easy. I understand we have some real challenges. I believe we can do it. I would not be standing here, Tim would not be with me -- but we need people in Washington who put you first, who get up every day thinking about middle-class families, who worry about where you are going to get the money to send your kids to college, how you are going to take care of your mom or dad because they are failing and what are you going to do for them? How are you going to deal with all of the challenges? That is what I try to do my entire life. That is who you should be electing, people who care about you, your families, your children.  Now, as Tim said, he asked if any of you watched the debate on Wednesday. Well, I will tell you, that was the third and last time I will ever have to debate Donald Trump. I mean, think about this, I have now spent 4 and a half hours on stage with Donald, proving once again I have the stamina to be President and commander in chief. And after every one of those debates, people have said, how did you do that? And really, you just have to be of good cheer when you find yourself in a situation like that. You are in front of 50, 60, 70, 80 million people. So, no matter what he would say, I just kept thinking of all the people I have met throughout this campaign. Just early today I've met Henry over there. Henry is on top of his dad's shoulders, and Henry gave me a note saying he hoped I would be president, and you know, I really want to be president for all of the kids in America to do everything I can to help you. You know, I also did have a chance to talk about some of the important concerns people have shared with me. From the first day I started this campaign back in april 2015, people have been telling me what is on their minds, and it is one of the greatest honors.  You know, sometimes it is just fleeting. I will be in a coffee shop shaking hands or I will come down and shake hands on a rope line, just running into somebody. And that person, that man or woman or that young person takes a moment to stop, looks into my eyes. I can tell they are trying to take my measure, and I am grateful that they take their vote, their choice so seriously. And then they might say something like, I have a really terrible problem in my family. My son or my daughter has gotten addicted to opiates or to heroin. What are you going to do about it? Or maybe they will say, my brother has schizophrenia, and we can't afford to get him the kind of consistent care he needs . Or maybe they will say, I am a diabetic. And the drug company has just raised the cost of insulin, and I can't afford it. What are you going to do about it?  That is the right question to ask anybody running for president, because at the end of the day, this is about you. As I said the other night, we are going to invest in the middle class. We are going to grow this economy from the middle out and the bottom up, not the top down. And we are going to make sure that we produce a enough good jobs with rising incomes so that every single person, especially every single young person in America can go as far as your hard work and talent will take you.  Now, I've got to say, I believe in hard work. That is how I was raised. I believe you've got to work for what you get in life. But I think we have to knock down some of the barriers that stand in the way of people getting ahead and going as far as they should. For me, that starts by believing in our country.  You know, there has been no other place in the history of the world that has given so much opportunity to so many. Do we have problems? We have problems. Do we have challenges? Of course we do. We are human beings. But boy, there is no more blessed place. And Donald Trump did something the other night that no other presidential nominee has ever done of either party. He refused to say he would respect the results of this election.  Make no mistakes about this, my friends. He is threatening our democracy. Look, I have lost elections. You don't feel very good the next day, believe me. But we know in our country the difference between leadership and dictatorship, right?  You know, the peaceful transition of power is one of those things that sets us apart, and whether you support me or my opponent, together we must show we support American democracy. And I believe both Donald Trump and I should be grateful for the opportunities that our country has given us. And the best way to demonstrate that we support our democracy is to turn out and vote. And there is an inspiring story being written by people across America right now. We have just reached a milestone, more than 200 million Americans are registered to vote in this election.  And you know what? That includes 50 -- more than 50 million young people. More than ever before. I find that a very hopeful sign. And here in Pennsylvania, hundreds of thousands of more voters are registered then were in 2012. What does this tell us? I think it tells us no matter how much negativity is out there, something exciting is happening right now. People are coming together -- democrats, republicans, independents -- all to reject hate and division. And in the states where they can, people are motivated to vote early, to defend core American values, and embrace a future where every person counts, everyone has a place, everyone can contribute. You see, despite what Donald Trump may think, most Americans really believe we can do better. Most Americans really believe women should be respected. Most Americans really believe that workers should be paid fairly. Most Americans be-lieve that the United States should work with our allies to lead the world and keep us safe.  The energy we are seeing in the final weeks of this campaign is about more than winning an election. It is about standing up to the kind of country that we want for ourselves and our children. And it is about the kind of lessons we want to teach our sons and daughters. I want you to know, if Tim and I are fortunate enough to be your president and vice president, we will work with everyone.  Now I imagine here in allegheny county and if you are from further west, you probably know people who are thinking about voting for Donald Trump. And here is what I want you to tell them. I want you to tell them that I understand that they need a president who cares about them, will listen to them, and I want to be their president, too.  Because whether you agree or disagree with me, whether you vote for me or vote against me, I believe we can disagree without being disagreeable. I have seen that. I know it can happen. And I know there are a lot of people here in Pennsylvania who have a lot of questions. They want to know, how do we move forward better. They want to know about their town where there used to be a lot of jobs and there are not as many any more. They are upset what they see around them. I get that. But anger is not a plan. And we need -- we need to work together. We need plans that will help us deal with the legitimate concerns and questions that people have in Pennsylvania. I think that is what our whole country needs right now. That's what I will try to do. I am not going to pretend that we can snap our fingers and solve our problems. That does not happen in the real world. But I know we can make progress together. The choice we face in this election is stark, especially when it comes to the economy.  Tim and I believe when the middle class thrives, America thrives. And when we invest in working families, in the middle class, in small businesses, we can make the economy work again for everybody. I think it is fair to say that both Donald Trump and Pat Toomey have a different perspective. They believe -- and they believe this -- if you give trillions of dollars -- and they mean trillion with a t -- of tax cuts to millionaires, billionaires, corporations, it will all trickle down to everybody else. It has not worked before and it has caused us a lot of messes we have had to clean up, and I have been privileged to see presidents up close and personal -- right. Married to one, that's right. Worked for one.  And here is what I know. That when you focus on helping the middle class, you end up lifting everybody. When you focus on helping the top, you help the top. That is not good enough. Donald likes to say he is on the side of American workers, but his actions tell a different story. Yes, he has bought cheap Chinese steel and aluminum for his construction projects. He should be buying good American-made steel that supports good American jobs. I would like to hear Donald explain to American steelworkers filing for unemployment why he put Chinese steel workers to work, instead of steelworkers here in Pennsylvania. And for all his talk about putting America first, he has made many of his products in 12 different countries. So if he wants to make America great again, why doesn't he start by making things in America? And we now know -- we now know he hasn't paid a dime in federal income taxes for years. He says that makes him smart. Well, I don't know how smart you have to be to lose a billion dollars in a year in the first place. Especially -- answer me this -- how do you lose a billion dollars when you are in the casino business?  Never could figure that out. But what it means is that every one of us is paying more in federal income taxes than a billionaire has. That is wrong and we will end of those kinds of loopholes and gimmicks.  I will tell you what. It also means Donald has contributed zero -- zero for our military, zero for our vets, zero for pell grants to help young people go to college, zero for our highways, zero for everything. And yet he stands up on stage and criticizes America. Well it's unfair and it's wrong. With your help, we will make the biggest investment in new jobs since World War II, jobs in infrastructure. Our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports, our water systems all need help, and those are a lot of good jobs waiting to be done, jobs that can't be exported out of Pennsylvania. I believe we can bring advanced manufacturing back to the United States. That is why we will invest $10 billion in a make it in America partnerships that brings together workers and unions and businesses, universities, and community colleges.  Some countries are going to take the lead with precision machineries. Some countries is going to take the lead with 3-d printing. We invented both of those technologies. We should take the lead and we should have the jobs.  We are also going to fight climate change with clean, renewable energy jobs. And we are going to help small businesses which will create two thirds of all of the new jobs in America. And we are going to defend your right to organize and bargain collectively for higher wages and benefits. Don't let anybody fool you, my friends. assault on worker rights and unions is an assault on the middle class.  It is time to say loudly and clearly, right to work is wrong for workers and wrong for America. So, I have set some big goals. I am excited about what we are going to do. And it's all going to put people to work right here. And sometimes folks say to me, how are you going to get that done? You go to the congress ...well first of all, I hope we will elect some or democrats. That will be job number one. Number two, I think it will be a very simple question. Our members of congress, members of the senate going to be on the side of the rich, the powerful, and the wealthy, or on your side? And you know what? They are going to have to answer that question. Because if they stay beholden to the special interest, if they continue to do the bidding of the lobbyist and lawyers and others who stand outside their doors -- I have been in the senate. I have seen it. I know it. If they are going to continue to do the work of those who are already privileged in America, then I want to make sure that they don't come back to Washington after the next election. We are in a great, great high school here, and I am so proud to be here. And so, we are going to be a good partner with education, especially with educators. We are going to start with universal pre-k. We want good schools with good teachers in every zip code so every kid gets a world-class education.  And I want us to bring technical education back to high school. I think it was a mistake when we took it out.  There are a lot of good jobs that you can be prepared for in today's economy -- coming out of high school, maybe going to community college, going into an apprenticeship program, and I want to lift up that work. A four-year college degree should not be and is not the only way to have a good job with the rising income and a satisfying life.  We are going to make public colleges and universities tuition free for any families making less than $125,000 a year. And we are going to help you pay down your college debt. It's going to be great. To help you pay it back as a percentage of your income at your job, so you are never on the hook for more than you can afford. I worked on this with Senator Bernie Sanders, and it's going to help save -- it's going to help save people thousands of dollars.  In fact after a year, maybe after you are here -- you can go to hillaryclin-ton.com/calculator to see how much your family can save. We want you to know we are going to deliver results for you.  I mean, ultimately it's pretty simple. I think the American dream is big enough for everybody and I want everybody to have your chance to get your piece of the American dream.  So, there's a lot of work we are going to be doing. We need to raise the national mini-mum wage. People who work full-time should not be mired in poverty. We are, as Tim said, going to guarantee equal pay for women. You know, look, it's not just a woman's issue. If you have a mother, which all of us do -- if you have a mother, a wife, a daughter, or a sister who's working, it's your issue. It's good for the entire family, it's good for our economy.  So my friends, there is a lot for us to do in the next 17 days. Because we have got to get the word out. We have got to tell everybody what we are doing and why this election is so critically important. And that's where all of you come in. If you do know people who are thinking about voting for our opponent.   You know, I hope you will stage an intervention. And I do hope you will talk about, you know, the reality versus the demagoguery of what we have seen in this campaign.  You know, we need to come together around all of the issues that are important to everybody and as I said in the beginning, whatever issue you care about, it's going to be on the ballot. I care a lot about making sure that women and girls are treated with dignity and respect that they deserve in our country. I care a lot about making sure that we save social security and we ensure that everybody has the benefits that they need in order to be able to live a decent life in retirement.  And, boy, do I care a lot about our constitution.  And maybe it's because on your behalf I went to 112 countries as your secretary of state. And I met a lot of people who in the us because we have been so steady and so committed to our constitutional system and our values. And what I hope is that you care as deeply as our founders did, as our parents and grandparents did, because maybe they came from somewhere else where they weren't treated right. Maybe they saw firsthand what it meant to be deprived of the rule of law.  You know, every time Donald Trump says he wants to jail his opponent, meaning me, I think to myself, you know, we don't do that in America. We actually have laws and courts and an independent judiciary.  Or, you know, when he blows up at a journalist or criticizes the press and goes on and on and on.  You know, I get criticized by the press. I know that is part of our democratic system. We believe in a free press. And boy, if you go to countries where there isn't one, you will understand why that is so important.  And when he says there should be a religious test -- a religious test for people at our borders, a country founded on religious freedom. You have to ask yourself, who is going to conduct the test? Are we going to get a quiz? What if the border security official does not believe you? Who gets to decide whether you get to come in or out based on your religion?  And if you haven't seen it yet, I hope you will go and look at the extraordinary statement by Mr. Khan on Youtube in a new video that we have put out. You remember, he pulled out a constitution at our convention. And he reveres our constitution. And for good reason. Because he, too, came from a place where the was no rule of law to speak of.  So, whatever issue you care about, this is an issue that will be decided by this election, and that is why I'm reaching out to republicans, democrats, independents, everyone. I know if we bring our talent, our energy, and our ambition to the work of building our country, we are going to see the best days of America ahead of us, and when your chil-dren and your grandchildren ask what you did in 2016 when everything was on the line, I hope you will say you voted for a better America. So, here we go. Just remember -- you've got to get out and vote, you've got to get everybody you know to get out and vote. If you do not know where to vote, please go to iwillvote.com. You can put your information in and, it is the magic of the internet. They will tell you where you are supposed to vote. You can go to hillaryclinton.com and sign up to volunteer. Or you can take your phone out right and text join to 47246. And if we can get all of you and everybody you know involved in this next 17 days, I will tell you this -- it is easy to forget how far our country has come.  There are a lot of people here -- as I said, whose parents and grandparents came here as immigrants. My grandfather, Hugh Rodam, came as an immigrant, as a young boy and settled in Scranton. And he went to work in the Scranton lace mills, he went to work in his teens, he worked there until he retired at the age of 65. He believed in our country. He believed in the kind of future he could get through his hard work. That is what I want everybody in our country to believe again. We are going to unleash the talent, the innovation, the energy that brought people like my grandfather here, but which we will harness for the future. Don't let anybody tell you America's best days are behind us. Don't believe that for a minute. We are going to pull together. We are going to make it clear that confidence and opti-mism, respect for each other, bringing folks together who may disagree but can begin to find common ground is what has always worked and it will work again. Help us. Help us create that kind of future, and help us prove once and for all that love trumps hate.  Thank you all." Are you ready to work hard in this election and win it? Are you ready to send Ted Strickland to the United States Senate? I've known Ted a long time. He is a champion for workers and families. He knows that Ohio needs more good jobs with rising wages. And he is the kind of person who will actually work to get things done, breaking through the gridlock in Washington. And this is important: unlike his opponent, Ted Strickland has never been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump. I also want to thank Mayor John Cranley and State Representative Alicia Reece and all the other elected officials, including my friend, the Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes, from across the river in Kentucky. And we are so fortunate to have two other champions for American families with us today. I am awed by the courage and commitment that both Mark and Gabby bring to their work, to do everything they can to help save lives in America. You know, as Gabby says every day when she goes out, fight, fight, fight. And fight she does. She fights to make sure that we save lives and we prevent injuries and we do it together ... to end the epidemic of gun violence that threatens our children, our fellow men and women, our country. And Gabby and Mark know something very important: there is a big majority of Americans, including a majority of gun owners, to stand behind and achieve commonsense gun safety measures. And I am looking forward to working with them as their partner. You know, you go through life, you go through the campaigns, there are ups and there are downs. And my mother, who had a really difficult life, she told me something that has stayed with me and certainly has come in handy in this campaign. Everybody gets knocked down; what matters is whether you get back up. And throughout this campaign, I have stayed focused on one thing: you ... your lives, your families, the problems that keep you up at night. Because that's really what this election is all about. It's not about the noise and the distractions. It's about what kind of country we want for our kids, and what kind of president can help get us there. I have so much that I want to do with you on behalf of Cincinnati and Ohio and America. And whether or not I get the chance to serve you really depends upon what happens in this election. Now, earlier today, I was up at Kent State, a great university, and I told them about some of the reasons why I think it's really important to get everybody out to vote in this election. But I started by saying that there's this new email story about ... why in the world the FBI would decide to jump into an election without evidence of any wrongdoing with just days to go. That's a really good question. But I want you to know ... look, I've said repeatedly I made a mistake, I'm not making any excuses, but I will tell you this. If they want to look at some more emails of one of my staffers, by all means, go ahead, look at them. And I know they will reach the same conclusion they reached when they looked at my emails last year, right? It wasn't even a close call, and I think most people have moved on. They're looking and focused on, okay, who is going to be the next president and commander-in-chief? Did any of you see the debates? Any of you see the debates? Well, I am ... I got a little bit of a chance. I did stand there for four and a half hours with Donald Trump, proving conclusively I have the stamina to do the job. But I did occasionally get a chance to ask people to take a look at my 30 years of public service, my plans for our country, what Tim Kaine and I have said we want to do, and then weigh that against my opponent, what he's done and said. I am running against someone who says he doesn't understand why we can't use nuclear weapons. He actually said, "Then why are we making them?" He wants more countries to have nuclear weapons. He's mentioned Japan, South Korea, even Saudi Arabia. Now, if you are hoping that he might surround himself with good people who would stop his crazy ideas, remember this. When he was asked who he consults with on foreign policy, Donald Trump said he didn't need to consult because, and I quote, "I have a very good brain." He said he knows more about ISIS than our generals do. [ And of course, the people that Donald Trump has around him include two men whose activities are also reportedly being investigated because of their ties to Russia, Vladimir Putin, and their allies. So in these last days, let's not get distracted from the real choice in this election. Donald Trump has proven himself to be temperamentally unfit and totally unqualified to be president and commander-in-chief. I have to tell you, it does not give me any pleasure saying that. It's not a small thing. I have watched and known a lot of the people who have run for president, both Republicans and Democrats. And look, I've had my disagreements with Republicans. I might have disagreed on policies or principles, but I never doubted their fitness to serve in this office. Donald Trump is different, and that's why there is so much at stake in this election. He has a dark and divisive vision for America that could tear our country apart. Abraham Lincoln understood a house divided against itself cannot stand, and that was over the greatest of challenges ... the challenge posed by slavery ... and we fought a civil war. But we also have to take stock of how divided we are today, the kinds of divisions that need to be healed to bring people together. I will tell you this. I want to bring not just Democrats, but Republicans and Independents, people who vote for me and people who vote against me, together. Because I have a very different vision of America. Instead of dark and divisive, it's hopeful and inclusive. It's big-hearted, not small-minded. It is about lifting people up, not putting them down. It's a vision that says, and I believe this with all my heart, we are stronger together. And America is great because America is good. Never forget that. Yes, we have our flaws; of course, we're only humans. But what we have done over the course of our history to keep widening the circle of opportunity and equality and freedom is unlike any other place in the history of the world. So we want an America where women are respected ... where our veterans are honored ... where parents and families are supported and workers are paid fairly. And we believe in an America where marriage is a right, and discrimination is wrong. An America that leads in the world and lives up to our values, where everyone counts, everyone has a place, and the American dream is big enough for everybody. So the choice could not be clearer and the stakes could not be higher. When I was at Kent State talking about the threats that Donald Trump poses to our national security, I was really struck. It was a very big crowd, and it was primarily students. And I thought to myself, well, I'm not going to give a rah-rah speech because I really want to talk about what this means to national security. And I was introduced by a gentleman named Bruce Blair, a former Air Force officer in charge of the nuclear codes and keys. A launch officer. And he came out for me, along with now more than 30 launch officers, and basically they said, we cannot support Donald Trump because he should never, ever be near the nuclear codes and keys. And even the prospect of an actual nuclear war doesn't seem to bother him. "Good luck. Enjoy yourselves, folks," is what he had to say about a potential nuclear conflict in Asia. I wonder if he even knows that a single ... a single ... nuclear warhead can kill millions of people? That is why dozens of retired nuclear launch officers took the unprecedented step of saying that Donald should, and I quote, "not have his finger on the button." And when it comes to handling a crisis, we've seen in this campaign that Donald Trump loses his cool at the slightest provocation ... when he's gotten a tough question from a reporter, or when he's challenged in a debate, or when he sees a protestor at a rally, when he's confronted by his own words. So imagine him in the Oval Office facing a real crisis. [ "</i>] Imagine him plunging us into a war because somebody got under his very thin skin. I hope you'll think about that when you cast your vote in this election. Think about what it takes to lead in a very complicated world, and in whose hands you want to put the safety of our children and grandchildren. And think about the difference between electing a president who will do nothing and president who will tackle the epidemic of gun violence in America. As Gabby knows so well, 33,000 Americans a year are killed guns. Thousands more are injured. It's an average of 90 people a day dying. Here in Ohio more people are killed by guns than die in car crashes. We have seen moviegoers gunned down in theaters, little children killed in their classrooms, clubgoers massacred in Orlando, nine faithful people murdered at Bible study in Charleston, South Carolina. And we've seen far too many young African American men and women killed by gun violence, which is now the leading cause of death for young black men. And when we think about that, we think of Dontre Hamilton or Jordan Davis or Trayvon Martin and others. I've had the great honor of getting to know their mothers, who have turned their grief into action and their mourning into a movement. But here's what I want to say. If anything else in our country were killing as many people, people of good faith, people who believe, like we do, in the Second Amendment, people who own guns, people who go hunting, people who are collectors, we would say, hey, wait a minute. This can't go on. We need comprehensive background checks to close the gun show loophole, close the online loophole. And we know here in Ohio a majority of gun owners support these common-sense steps to prevent gun violence because they know we can respect the Second Amendment and keep our kids and communities safe at the same time. And we need to keep guns out of the hands suspected terrorists. If you are too dangerous to fly, you are too dangerous to buy a gun, period. And look. There is a very clear difference. Donald Trump won't stand up to the gun lobby. He's sold out to them. In fact, the gun lobby is spending more on ads to get Donald Trump elected than any other group, more than $7 million in Ohio alone. And in return, Donald Trump has promised to repeat President Obama's actions to strengthen criminal background checks. Donald says guns should be allowed in nightclubs that serve alcohol. He's even said, on his very first day in office, he would require every school in America to let people carry guns into our classrooms. How can anyone think our schools would be safer with more guns? So I have stood up to the gun lobby for years, which is why they are running all of these ads against me. And I will stand up to them as president. I will work with Gabby and Mark and Americans for Responsible Solutions to pass common sense reforms because we've got to keep guns out of the wrong hands and help save lives. I will also get up every day in the White House working my heart out for you, whatever I can do to knock down barriers to empower people, to get the economy working for everybody, not just those at the top. That's how I was raised. I was raised to believe that if you work hard ... and I believe in hard work ... you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead in America. And I will never ever quit on you. When I tell you I'm going to try to do something that will make a positive difference in your life, I don't care what the political or other barriers are. We're going to find a way over, under, around, or through until we get it done. I've been fighting for families and underdogs my entire life, and I'm not stopping now. Remember, when our opponents go low, we go high. We're not going to be distracted. We're not going to be knocked off course. We know how much this election matters. And everything all of you can do between now and the time that the polls close is going to really count. Now, the Donald Trump campaign strategy is pretty simple. They've announced it. Their strategy is: get women to stay home, get young people to stay home, and get people of color to stay home. It's all part of his scorched-earth campaign, but it actually adds up to more than half of our whole population when you stop to think about it. And it goes against everything we stand for. So if you're as upset as I am by the campaign that he has run, the things he has said, insulting not just women but immigrants, Latinos, African Americans, prisoners of war, Muslims, veterans, the military ... I mean, the list goes on and on. It's almost impossible to understand how somebody could run for president who seems not to like America as much as he does. So you know the best way to stop him: by showing up with the biggest turnout in history. We need more Americans to vote. And I think we have a chance to get more Americans from all walks of life to vote because we're already seeing record turnout. Twenty-three million people have already voted in this election. And more than one million of them are right here in Ohio. There is no doubt if we vote, we win. So, please, if you haven't voted early, please do so. And please get your friends and your family, everybody you know to vote. Take people to vote with you. Try to help those who might have a little problem getting there. Make sure that everybody you know understands early voting has begun. And you can go to iwillvote.com to find your nearest early voting location because, make no mistake, whatever issue you care about ... I've only mentioned a few tonight, but whatever issue you care about is on the ballot. Now, it may be my name and my opponent's name, but where we stand on these issues, what we've done in the past, what we have said we want to do in the future, that is all on the ballot. The future of our economy is at stake, of our education system is at stake. Fighting climate change and clean, renewable-energy jobs are at stake. LGBT equality is at stake. Equal pay for women is at stake. Actually, in the end, the American dream itself is at stake. So I want you to think about how you will feel on November 9th.    I think that's the right answer. But just suppose, just suppose you go to bed early. Suppose you go to bed early. Maybe you were too busy to vote or maybe you didn't make calls or knock on doors. I want you to imagine. So you get up early on the morning of the 9th. And you log on to the news to find out, hey, what's going on, or maybe you turn on the TV or the radio, and you hear.   I want you to really understand what that means for you and for all of us because I prefer for us to be motivated by what we're for, not what we're against. But I also think it's prudent to imagine what could happen if we don't do our part. And when in the future somebody asks you, maybe your kids or your grandkids, 'What did you do when everything was on the line?' I want you to be able to say, 'I voted for a better, fairer, stronger America.' Let's go out and, in these next eight days, do everything we can to make it clear we're going after the kind of future that includes everybody. We're going to build this economy: new jobs, rising wages. We're going to make college affordable and help you pay down your student debt. We are going to do what will give you the best chance for your own lives and the lives of our kids and our grandkids. So if we build that future together, we will be able to say we were part of making sure that America's best days are still ahead of us. And we will prove, once and for all, that love trumps hate. Thank you all." Oh, it is so wonderful to be here on this college campus, and to see so many young people here as Maggie and Elizabeth and I were walking up to the stage. And a lot of people were hanging out of the windows, and we're glad that you've got the best view of what we're doing here.  It's also exciting to be here with two weeks left because this is the most consequential election of our lifetime, and to see the energy and enthusiasm that this crowd displayed ... I saw it yesterday in North Carolina, I saw it the day before in Ohio, it really does demonstrate that Americans are really looking at what's at stake and are coming to the conclusion that we all have to be involved in the remaining days of the campaign. And that everyone needs to turn out to vote. In New Hampshire, you have a lot of reasons to vote ... you've got great candidates for Congress, Annie Kuster and Carol Shea Porter, who deserve your support, and you've got a great candidate for governor, Colin Van Ostern, thank you! I know that Maggie, and Elizabeth and I have been out here giving the full dose, but I hope that you will know what is at stake in the governor's race, and in sending these two extraordinary women to the House, and boy, it is exciting to be here with Maggie and Elizabeth because they are people who fight for you every single day. I know these women, and it is a privilege to be on this stage with them. Now, Elizabeth Warren has a track record of making it her mission to stand up against Wall Street. And she is going to make sure that Wall Street never wrecks Main Street again!  But you may not know that she was the person behind setting up the agency that protects consumers. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and it was set up to stand against and to do something about the kinds of fraud and abuse we've seen from Wells Fargo. And they are on the front lines of returning billions of dollars to Americans who have been cheated and defrauded by big companies, by banks and others.  In fact, I think it is fair to say some of the best TV that you can see is on C-SPAN when Elizabeth is going after a bank executive or regulator. She is refusing... refusing to let them off the hook, and she is not just speaking for herself, is she? She is speaking for every single American who is frustrated and fed up. And I am so looking forward to working with her to rewrite the rules of our economy to make sure we both grow it and make it fairer for every single person working hard here in America. I know we are up here without our phones so we cannot check tweets but ... I kind of expect if Donald heard what she just said, he is tweeting away. She gets under his thin skin like nobody else. Whether she is calling him out of his mysterious tax returns, she exposes him for what he is ... temperamentally unfit and totally unqualified to be president of the United States. And Maggie is going to be a great United States senator for New Hampshire. You do not have to take my word or Elizabeth's word. Look at what she has already done. Under Maggie's leadership, New Hampshire has the lowest unemployment rate in the entire country. During her governorship, it was ranked as the best state in the country for business, and she has done it the New Hampshire way. She has brought people together, Democrats and Republicans, and Independents, and I think she has the biggest legislature, probably in the world, that she has to deal with. So she has really honed her skills ... listening and trying to work with people, and she has taken issues that do keep families up at night. From the sky rocketing costs of college and prescription drugs , to helping students to figure out ways to afford to get their education to helping those suffering from addiction or mental health, to raising wages for hard working families. What I love about Maggie is that she is independent, she knows how to find common ground, and how to stand her ground. And that is exactly the kind of leader we need in the United States Senate. Because we've got to break through the gridlock and dysfunction that has unfortunately marred Washington. We have to get back to listening respectfully. We can disagree without being disagreeable. And that is why we need leaders like Maggie, and unlike her opponent, she has never been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump. She knows he should not be a role model for our kids or anybody else for that matter. So I hope in these next 14 days, you do everything you can to support her. And I want to say a word about Colin, who I have also known for a number of years now. And Maggie is leaving some big shoes. She does not look like it, but she is, she is leaving some big shoes to fill as governor. Colin is the person for that job. You know as a member of Executive Council, and I remember this because it took a lot of guts. He helped lead the fight for funding Planned Parenthood in New Hampshire. Against his opponent by the way, and he has showed that he will stand up for women's health 100 percent of the time, not just when it is politically convenient. He also worked with Maggie to cross party lines to help expand Medicaid to more than 50,000 granted stators.  And Colin wants to do more to invest clean energy like wind and solar to hold down energy costs to create more good jobs here in New Hampshire and to protect the beautiful environment of this state. And he will fight to put into action the promise of higher education within reach for more families. So please during these next days, make sure you're doing everything you can for Colin, for Carol, and for Annie.  Now did anybody see the last debate? I stood next to Donald Trump in three debates for four and a half hours proving once again, I have the stamina to be president. I've tried to use the time I had in all three to talk about what people talk to me about, starting here in New Hampshire and going across the country, because I take it really seriously. I think that the problems that keep you up tonight, that stand in the way of your getting ahead and staying ahead, of providing the best opportunity of a good middle class job with a rising income for you and your kids, those are the problems that someone running for president should actually listen to, pay attention to and come up with solutions for. So, you know, I do have a lot of plans, I do. And I get criticized for having so many plans. Tim Kaine and I have actually written a book ... oh, there's one copy right there! It's called ... oh, another copy! It's called 'Stronger Together,' and we lay out all of our plans for what we want to do if we're so honored as to be president and vice president. And, you know, I do have this old-fashioned idea that if I'm here asking for your vote to be your president, I should tell you what I'm going to do, and maybe, as I said yesterday in North Carolina, maybe it's a bit of a women's thing because we make lists. We do, we make lists and we try to write down what we're supposed to do and then cross them off as we go through the day and the week. And so, I want you think about our plans are as our lists ... our lists as a country. We are going to get our economy working for everybody, not just those at the top. We are going to make college affordable. We are going to lower prescription drug costs, and we're going to do everything we can to keep faith with what we have said we're going to do. What a novel idea! We're actually going to try to deliver results for you. But I got to tell you. During that debate, Donald said something. Well, he said a lot of things that were troubling, but he said something truly horrifying. He became the first person running for president ... Republican or Democrat ... who refused to say that he would respect the results of this election. Now, that is a direct threat to our democracy. I'm not going to try to call it anything else because that's what it is. All this talk about the election being rigged, trying to stir up people who are supporting him at his rallies, that is a direct threat to our democracy. And I got to tell you ... as your secretary of state, I went to 112 countries and I went to countries where people were jailed for being political opponents, where they were exiled, where they were killed. I take this really seriously. And for me, the peaceful transfer of power is one of the things that makes our country great ... something that ... something we can't lose, something we shouldn't even doubt. We cannot give in to cynicism, and I don't think we are. I'll tell you what's exciting to me is across this country, at the very moment Donald Trump is making this unprecedented attack on our fundamental values, our institutions, millions of people are standing up for democracy, registering, volunteering, voting early. So when you get a little discouraged or you get frustrated by what you see in this campaign, think of this: we have just reached a historic milestone. More than 200 million Americans are now registered to vote. And most exciting, that includes more than 50 million young people, the biggest number ever. Now you only see numbers like this when people are standing up for what they believe in and I'm proud to see Americans coming together ... Democrats, Republicans and Independents ... to reject hate and division. And we're seeing that in New Hampshire, too. We are more than our disagreements, we Americans. There is so much more that unites us than divides us. I'm proud to have the support of more than 150 Republican leaders in this state who put country before party. But this energy we're seeing is not just because of what we're against, as important as that is, it's because what we're for. It's about fighting for a future where everyone counts, where everyone has a place, and no one is left out or left behind. Because to me, and I hope to you as well, this is about more than winning an election, it's about the kind of country we want for our kids and our grandkids. That's what this has to be about. It's about the lessons we want to pass on to our sons and our daughters. You know, we believe we should honor the men and women who fight for our country and that America is safer when we work with our allies to lead the world with strength and intelligence. Yet my opponent attacked a grieving Gold Star family whose son died in Iraq. He has no plan to defeat ISIS. And just last night he tweeted that the new effort underway to push the terrorists out of the key city of Mosul is already, and I quote, 'a total disaster.' And that our country is, quote, 'looking so dumb.' Imagine, imagine, this is a guy who says he knows more about ISIS than the generals. I don't think so. He's basically declaring defeat before the battle has even started. He's proving to the world what it means to have an unqualified commander in chief. It's not only wrong, it's dangerous, and it needs to be repudiated on November the 8th here in New Hampshire and across America. But just in case you think that this is new for Donald, it shouldn't surprise you or anybody else, and I'll tell you why. He has been denigrating America for decades. It started before he campaigned against me. It started before President Obama took office. In fact, back in 1987, he spent $100,000 on an ad in The New York Times criticizing President Reagan. He said, and I quote, 'The world is laughing at America.' Does that sound familiar? This is someone who roots for failure and takes glee in mocking our country no matter who our president is. Now that may be who Donald Trump is, but this election is about who we are. And I want us ... I want us to remember, America is great because America is good, right? And as our wonderful First Lady Michelle Obama said right here in New Hampshire, 'When they go, we go high.' This election poses a very clear choice on the economy. When the middle class thrives, America thrives. As Elizabeth said, she is a perfect example of how that works in America. So am I. So are every one of you here. That's what I want for every single person, especially young person, in America. With your help, we're going to not only have Elizabeth back in the Senate, but send Maggie, send Carol, send Annie and then make the biggest investment in new jobs since World War II. What does that mean? That means jobs in infrastructure, our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports, our mass transit, our water systems. There is a lot of great work to be done here. And guess what? Those are jobs that can't be exported. They've got to be done, right here in New Hampshire and across America. I want us to invest in advanced manufacturing, and there are, I know, a lot of skeptics about that. They say, 'Well, we can't compete in manufacturing anymore.' Well, I'll tell you what. I don't want us competing with low wage jobs. I want us competing for the high wage jobs. Germany is a major exporter of advanced manufacturing products. I want to compete with Germany and countries like that, precision, machining, 3D printing. I want us to invest more in technology, innovation and research and yes, in clean energy, because we're going to make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century. I think we can deploy a half a billion more solar panels within the first four years and enough clean energy to power every home by the end of 10 years. That's what I want people to be working on and thinking about and striving to achieve. And I am really excited about what we can do to make sure every young American is prepared. I want to start in the early years of life in early education, universal pre-K. I want kids to be prepared to succeed. Because we are in a competition, and you know what? I want us to step up and compete and win. And I want our schools ... I want kids to have good teachers and good schools in every zip code, and I want to be a good partner with our teachers and our educators here in New Hampshire. And I want to bring back technical education to high school. I think we really ... we really shut the door on too many young people who could've gotten skills that would've given them the chance to get ahead. And working with our community colleges, we need to make sure that every young person and every person coming back to upgrade or change skills can go to a community college. And yes, we are going to make four-year college affordable. Just this week, a new report came out showing that New Hampshire students have very high levels of debt, and I know Maggie has been fighting that. And she's had a moratorium, and she's done what she could at the state level. But we got to work together at the national level to make this happen for students in New Hampshire, families in New Hampshire. So after our primary was over ... and you know what, I was really proud ... I was really proud of the campaign that Bernie Sanders and I ran. And it was a campaign ... it was a campaign about ideas, not insults. And that's what campaigns should be about. And after it was over, Bernie and I got together. We put our heads together. And we came up with a plan to make public colleges and universities tuition free for any families making less than $125,000 a year. And if you make more than that, it will be debt free. In other words, pay what you can, but let's not have kids and families going into debt to get an education. This should be an investment that we make on behalf of them and our country's future. And no matter where you go, to a great school like this, or anywhere else, we will help you pay down your student debt. We will make is easier, because we a re going to make it as a percentage of you income, so you will never be on the hook for more than you can afford. And if your interested to see how much you and your family can save, you can actually go to hillaryclinton.com/calculator to see how much you can save under this plan that we are proposing. Now, I think in addition to growing the economy, we need to do a lot more on small business. Two-thirds of new jobs will come from small business so we are going to be just focused on how we are going to be able to start and grow your small business. And then we do have to make the economy fairer, and that starts with raising the national minimum wage, because if you work full time, I am talking about full time workers, you should not still be in poverty at the end. Work should provide a ladder of opportunity for people willing to work for it to climb. Right? We are going to guarantee equal pay, we are going to make affordable child care so nobody pays more than 10 percent of your income for childcare. We are going to work for paid family leave. Because this is the way families are today. We are not living in the 1950s. Families are under new stresses and strains, and I meet so many who are really just at the edge. They are making all they can make. One parent working full-time, two parents working full-time, sometimes part-time on top of full-time. The other day, Tim Kaine and I were in Pittsburgh. There was a long line of people, big overflow, which we couldn't get into the main room where we were. So, Tim was talking to the families there, and there was a woman holding her three-year-old child, a daughter, I think. Tim was shaking hands, and the woman looked and she said, 'I came here hoping that I could tell you or Secretary Clinton that I had my baby three years ago, and the day after, I had my baby, I was fired because I called and ask if I could have a few weeks because it had been a difficult pregnancy. But my baby was fine but not all that she needed to be. I got fired.' And Tim came in, and he is such a wonderful man. What a fine human being. And he said, 'To be there are the reasons everyday why I get so motivated in this election, and I just have another reason.' He told me that story. I think your president should care about that. I think your president should wake up everyday thinking, 'Okay, how do I help empower the most people to make the most out of their own lives, how to break down the barriers that give you the chance to go as far as your hard work and talent will take you?' Sometimes people say, 'How are you going to get all this done?' I have proposed plans that do not add a penny to the debt because I see some of my long time friends who back in the 1992 campaign ... where my husband ended up, we had a balance budget and a surplus, and actually, we were on the way to paying down the national debt, but here is what happened. What happened is trickle-down economics came back. So here is what I am going to do. We are going to ask the wealthy to finally pay their fair share. We are going to ... we are going to close the loopholes, we are going to end the fact that millionaires can pay a lower tax rate than a nurse or a teacher or a police officer. We are going to make big banks pay for the risks they pose to our economy because Elizabeth is absolutely right. No ... no bank is too big to fail, and no one should be above the law, and we are going to enforce that and contrast that with Donald Trump. He believes that if you give trillions and that is trillions with a 't' in tax cuts to the wealthy millionaires and billionaires and corporations, and everything will work out. Well, it will for him. That is trickle down economics on steroids. And he would wipe away the tough new rules that President Obama imposed on Wall Street. He would eliminate the Consumer Protection Financial Bureau that Elizabeth did so much to create. And you know that was bad enough, but then in the debates, we learned he hasn't paid any income tax for years. So he hasn't paid a penny to support our military, our veterans, Pell grants for kids to get an education, health or anything else. And his explanation was he lost a billion dollars in a year. Now, I've pondered this. I've really pondered this. He actually said it made him smart not to pay income taxes, but how smart are you to lose a billion dollars in a year? Has anyone here been to a casino? He lost a billion dollars running casinos. Who does that? I've never heard of anybody. So, we've got to make it clear that Donald is not on the side of America workers or American families. For all of his talk about putting America first, he makes his products in at least 12 other countries. He stiffs small businesses, mom and pop contractors who work for him. My dad was a small business owner. He worked really hard. I'm just glad he never got a contract from Donald Trump because it was hard work, and people who do that work should be rewarded, not taken advantage of. So we know a lot about how Donald Trump works, and today, today, we heard yet another story. It's about a maintenance worker at one of his golf courses. This maintenance courses told his co-workers he was gay, and they started harassing him. They used anti-gay slurs to his face, they threw rocks and golf balls at him, his supervisor saw it and did nothing, and it got so bad, he wound up in the hospital. Finally, he went to the police for help. He couldn't go back to work because he was too scared for his safety, and then he was fired by Trump's golf club. Now, this is a heart-wrenching story on a lot of levels. For starters, it's a painful reminder of the harassment, violence, and discrimination that too many LGBT Americans still face every day. And it is deeply disturbing that instead of stepping in to stop the tormentors, Trump's golf club turned on the victim for coming forward. If that's how Donald Trump runs his business, what does that say about how he would run our country? So my friends, there are lots of reasons, so many, to take this election seriously. But here's what I want you to know: of course, I want you to vote for all of us, but more than that, I want you to vote for yourselves, and for your families, and for your hope for our future together. Because if you believe women and girls should be treated with dignity and respect and women should be able to make our own health care decisions, and marriage equality should be protected, and that we have to take on the epidemic of substance abuse, disorders, and addiction. If you believe in a foreign policy where we work with our allies, not insult them, and achieve common goals towards peace and prosperity, then you have to vote. All of these issues are on the ballot this November, and I believe with all of my heart, that we will after this election, get together to help heal the divides that have sprung up and are so painful among us. So please register and vote on the same day. Go to iwillvote.com to confirm your polling place. Come help us these last two weeks. Go to hillaryclinton.com, sign up to volunteer, take out your phone, text 'JOIN,' J-O-I-N to 47246 and get everybody you know to come out and vote. I think this election is going to turn on who is motivated to vote so we need each and every one of you to do everything you can to make it clear to everybody you know that our future is at stake. If you ought to be part of a positive, optimistic, confident, unifying future, please come out to vote on November 8th here in New Hampshire, and prove once and for all that love trumps hate.  Thank you all! Both Secretary Clinton and Congresswoman Elizabeth Warren were introduced by Margaret Hassan, the Governor of New Hampshire and currently running for the US Senate. The most important election in our lifetimes. I'm so grateful to see all of you and I want to thank the elected officials who are here, Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman-Schult, Congressman Alcee Hastings, Congressman Ted Deutch, Commissioner Mark Bogen and others who are here, along with Senator Bill Nelson's wonderful wife, Grace Nelson. So we are glad you are all here with me. And I got to tell you, I was thrilled to be introduced by the person I hope will be the next senator from the great state of Florida, Congressman Patrick Murphy.You know, I think Patrick is exactly the kind of senator that Florida needs and deserves because he will help us break through gridlock and create more good jobs with rising incomes. And Patrick knows we have to build an economy from the middle out and the bottom up, not from the top down. I also appreciate the fact that we now are seeing an emerging bipartisan consensus that we need to fix our broken criminal justice system, do you agree? But it's going to take strong and committed leaders, like Patrick Murphy, who are ready to show up and fight hard and work to get this done. And -- and this is important, my friends, unlike his opponent, Patrick Murphy has never been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump. I think Florida deserves a senator who's going to fight for comprehensive immigration reform that will keep families together against a deportation force. This is what is so unimaginable, of law enforcement officials to go door to door, house to house, business to business, school to school, rounding up 11 million people. I think that is so wrong, and it is not going to happen in America. So you deserve also a senator who actually believes climate change is real, as opposed to someone who every time he's asked says, well I'm not a scientist. And I always wonder, why don't you talk to a scientist? Like start here at Broward College, you could talk to scientists. And you deserve a senator who would never say that Social Security and Medicare have, and this is a quote, "weakened us as a people." His solution, Patrick's opponent's solution, is to privatize Medicare.   And you deserve a senator who would never support cutting $360 million from Florida's schools, because Patrick knows every child in Florida deserves a world-class education. So my friends, Patrick Murphy is a smart, tough-minded legislator and an independent voice. That's what we need more of in Washington, people like Patrick who are going to get up every day and go to work for you, a better life for you and your families, instead of blocking progress at every turn, listening to the special interests and powerful forces that really are not interested in what it's going to take for every one of you to get ahead and stay ahead. So please, when you get out and vote, please remember you can send Patrick Murphy to the United States Senate, and you will be glad you did. Now, I know there's an overflow crowd outside and I'm so sorry they can't be in, but I'm told that they can hear us and maybe even see us, and I want to thank them for coming as well. I got to ask you, did anybody see the last debate? Well, the good news -- the good news was, it was the last debate.   Thank you. Yeah, you know, you're right. That last debate was like an early birthday present, right? But here's what I wanted you to remember. I stood next to Donald Trump for four and a half hours, proving once again I have the stamina to be president and commander- in-chief. You know, I tried as much as I could to talk about all issues that are on your minds that I believe we can work together to improve. And in fact, my wonderful running mate I, Senator Tim Kaine, wrote a book, called "Stronger Together," and we put all of our policies in it because I want you to know what we're going to try to do if we're so fortunate enough to be the next president and vice president.  And I think it's important, because I want you to have confidence that we're going to work every day to implement the plans that we have put forth. And I tried in the debate to draw the contrasts with Donald Trump, who doesn't really have very many plans. You know, I've tried to run a campaign based on issues, he's run a campaign based on insults. And so in the debate, we didn't have a lot to talk about, other than he continued true to form to throw out his insults. But in that last debate, he said something that I found horrifying. Well, he said a lot of things, cut there's one thing in particular that I wanted to point out because no presidential candidate, Republican or Democrat, has ever said this. He refused to say that he would respect the outcome the election. I guess we shouldn't be too surprised, this is the same guy who said he thought the Emmys were rigged against him. But this is serious. You know, on January 20th, the first thing a president does is to take an oath to preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution, and I have serious doubts about whether Donald Trump even understands what that means. In America, we don't say we're going to keep you in suspense about whether we will respect the outcome of an election. We have free and fair elections and the peaceful transfer of power. That is one thing that makes American great, it makes America who we are. And we don't impose religious tests at our borders because we are a country that was founded on religious liberty. And we don't punish newspapers or journalists that try to cover the news or are critical of politicians, or threaten to restrict the First Amendment, because our democracy depends on a free press. And we don't incite violence and turn people against each other. We respect the open exchange of ideas that a democracy depends on. You know, I've got to say, I bet some of you or maybe your parents, or your grandpar-ents, came from places where none of that was true, right? There is a reason why America is the greatest and longest lasting democracy the world has ever known, because we believe that no matter what you look like or where your parents were born or who you love, you have the right to be treated equally and fairly in the United States. And Donald Trump is attacking everything that has set our country apart for 240 years. Now, after spending his entire campaign attacking one group of Americans after another -- immigrants, African Americans, Latinos, women, POWs, Muslims, people with disabilities -- now his final target is democracy itself. So here's what I want you to know, in the four years, we are going to change some things in America, right? I do want to get the economy working for everyone, not just those at the top. And we're going to do that, along with other positive changes, but we are not going to change the fundamental values that made America the greatest nation in the history of the world. You know, I think it all started -- I think this all started when George Washington re-fused to become a king. Right? Now, Donald Trump probably would have called him a loser. Instead, that was one of the most important decisions any president has ever made. Eight years, it's time to move on. We fought a revolution so that we would not have a king. We would not be subjects, we would be independent citizens. I cherish that idea. So here's the good news. Americans are coming together. At the very moment when Donald Trump is making an unprecedented attack on our democracy, millions of people are registering, voting early and volunteering in this campaign. And here's something very exciting. We have reached a milestone. More than 200 million Americans are now registered, and that includes 15 million young people, the most ever in history. And you know what? More than six million people have already voted and more than one million of them are right here in Florida.  So I think you only see numbers like this when people are standing up for what they really believe in, and that includes not just Democrats but Republicans and Independents coming together to reject hate and division, and I am so excited about what that means. But the energy we are seeing across Florida and America is not just because of what we are against, it's about what we're for. It really is. It's about fighting for that future where everyone counts, everyone has a place and no one is left out or behind. But I want you to know we still have a lot of work to do. I feel good, but boy, I am not taking anything for granted. I'm going to work as hard as I can between now and the close of the election that's two weeks from today. And you know, it's so important for Florida. There are so many issues that we need to remind people about. Last time I was here, I campaigned with Al Gore and he said a lot about the climate crisis. And you know why? Because we're seeing the reality of climate change every day in Florida. We are seeing areas in Miami even on sunny days without a drop of rain where the streets are flooding. And the ocean is rising. And what we've got to do is make sure that this issue -- fighting climate change, creating clean renewable energy jobs -- stays at the top of the priorities, and that's why you need a new senator like Patrick Murphy. I have to say, nobody should want to wake up on November 9th and wonder whether there was more you could have done. I hope you will wake up on November 9th proud that you took a stand and voted for an America that belongs to all of us, where we set big goals and we work together to achieve them. I got to tell you, I believe America is great because America is good. And I want to tell you one other thing. I want to say one other thing that's really very important to me. We should honor the men and women in uniform who fight for our country. That's why I was so appalled when Donald Trump tweeted that the new effort underway to push the terrorists out of the key city of Mosul is already, and I quote him, "a total disaster" and that our country is, again a quote, "looking dumb." Really? He's declaring defeat before the battle has even started. He's proving once again he is unqualified to be commander in chief of our military. Here's another example. He was asked if he would defend our allies. He said well, first he'd want to know if they made any payments to us to defend them. And when asked specifically about Israel, he said, and I quote again, he would "love to be neutral." Now, we can't have a president who says he's neutral on Monday, pro-Israel on Tuesday, and who knows what on Wednesday, because in his mind, everything is negotiable. I have a different view. We stand with our allies. We stand with those who will help us defeat terrorism. So I -- I get pretty excited about what we could to together. And with your help, we're going to make the biggest investment in new jobs since World War II -- jobs in infra-structure and advanced manufacturing, and clean renewable energy, and small busi-nesses. I want us to make America the clean energy super power of the 21st century. We can create millions of jobs and protect our planet at the same time. And I've got to say no state, no state should care more about this issue than Florida. Right? And you know, I'll tell you something that it's kind of sad, to be honest with you. I've traveled all over the country. And in New Jersey and Massachusetts, they have more solar power than the Sunshine State. Why? Well, because you have a governor and a legislature who, like your current senator, doesn't want to believe the science of climate change; doesn't see the opportunity that Florida has to be literally the global leader in clean energy. And so I want to deploy a half-billion more solar panels by the end of my first term, and enough clean energy to power every home in America within 10 years. And we're also going to strengthen education at every level, starting with universal pre-K, and working -- working with our teachers to make sure every child has a good school with good teachers in every zip code. And here's what I want all the students to hear, we're going to make college more affordable for everyone. You know, after our primary, which was hard-fought, and I was proud of the primary we ran because it was about issues. Senator Sanders and I got together, came up with a plan to make public colleges and universities tuition-free for any families making less than $125,000 a year. That's the vast majority of families. And if you're over that, we're going to make it debt-free. So pay what you can afford. But I don't want to see young people and their families going into debt. I view this as an investment. And that's why we're going to make it easier for you to afford to pay back your college debt -- pay it down and pay it off. And I also want more pathways to good jobs that don't require a four-year college de-gree. Let's return technical education to high schools. Let's do more with our community colleges. Let's have more apprenticeship programs so that everybody has a chance at a good job. And you know, in addition -- in addition to making the economy grow and making sure people are ready with the skills to do these jobs, I want to make it fairer. That's why I want to raise the national minimum wage. If you work full-time, you shouldn't still be in poverty. And don't you think it is finally maybe past time to guarantee equal pay for women's work? And, you know, I always tell crowds, this is not a women's issue. It's a family issue. If you have a wife, a mother, a sister or a daughter working, it's your issue. And that's why we have got to get this fixed once and for all. And let's make childcare affordable. And let's have more profit sharing. And let's do the kinds of things that will lift everybody up. Now, you know, when I talk about raising equal pay for women as one of my primary issues, you know, Donald Trump or somebody always says, well, there she goes playing the woman card. And I've got to tell you, I don't believe that's what it is. I think we're paying -- playing the smart card. Because we want everybody's incomes to go up. That's how we're going to get this economy really moving forward, creating new jobs. And so if that's playing the woman card, you know what we say, deal me in. I've also said I will pledge not to do anything that would raise taxes on people making less than $250,000 a year, because we don't need to do that. We can go where the money is, the millionaires and the billionaires, the corporations, to make them pay their fair share to support the kind of growth that we need in our economy. We're going to close the loopholes and make sure no multi- millionaire can get away with paying a lower rate than a nurse or a police officer or a teacher. Now remember when we learned in one of the debates that Donald Trump hadn't paid any federal taxes? For about 20 years is the best guess we've got, and his excuse, I love his excuse, his excuse was well, he lost $1 billion in a year. I've been really pondering this. How does anybody lose $1 billion in a year, especially when you're running casinos? Think about it. Has anybody here ever been to a casino?   Well, if losing $1 billion is smart, I think that's kind of upside down and backwards. I think people should be working hard to make their incomes, to support their families, and that's what we're going to do because we don't want the kind of values that Donald Trump used in running his business to be in our government. He stiffs -- he stiffs small businesses. My dad was a small business owner. Donald Trump has refused to pay all kinds of folks, workers, small businesses installing drapes or marble or glass, or where he bought pianos, he didn't pay them. He just doesn't pay them and he gets away with it because he turns and he says to these small businesses well, go ahead and sue me. Well, my dad, because he was a small business man, I know he could never have afforded that, so I'm just glad he never got a contract from Donald Trump, because our family would have been hurt by that. So here's the bottom line and here's what I need you to do. We have got to get everybody you know to turn out and vote, and you have early voting now and it's going to be much easier for some of you to vote early. And if you believe in any of the issues that we have talked about in this campaign, if you believe that women and girls should be treated with respect, if you believe that marriage equality should be protected. If you believe -- if believe in science and believe we should take action, if you believe America belongs to everybody willing to work for it and we should stand up against any kind of negative tax, then I hope you will come out and vote because it's going to be a close election. Pay no attention to the polls. Don't get -- don't get complacent, because we've got to turn people out. So I'm asking you to vote for me, I'm asking you to send Patrick Murphy to the Senate, I'm asking you most importantly to vote for yourselves, because really, that's what is at stake. So early voting began here in south Florida yesterday. It goes through Sunday, November 6th. You can go to your early voting site in your county between 7 AM and 7 PM. In fact, you can go across the street right now to the North Regional Library and cast your ballot today. And we have volunteers and staff ready to escort you, so hey, go ahead and vote now. And you can go to iwillvote.com to confirm your polling place and make sure you have a plan to vote. But don't stop there. If you will join us in these next two weeks, every phone call you make, every door you knock on will make a difference. So please, go to HillaryClinton.com, sign up to volunteer, take out your phone, text JOIN to 47246, and get involved, because the bigger the turnout, the bigger statement we will make about the kind of country we are and the future we want to build together. Now, let me just end by saying that people ask me all the time, you know, what moti-vates you, how do you do this day after day? And you know, look, I love this country, and I feel blessed. I feel blessed, and I want everybody to have the same chance to go after your part of the American Dream, and I think the American Dream is big enough for everybody. I think a lot about my two grandchildren, because obviously, I would do anything to help them, but it's not just them. I want to help everybody's children and grandchildren, because the kind of country we will have when they become adults will be affected by the decisions we make now on education, on healthcare, on ending the epidemic of gun violence, on getting the cost of prescription drugs down, on preserving and protecting Social Security and Medicare, doing what we must to make sure we're passing on a country that provides the same level of opportunity to all who come after us. So please join me. This is bigger than me, it's bigger than any of us. It's even bigger than Donald Trump, if you can believe it. This is a crossroads election that's going to determine so much about what kind of country we have in the decades ahead. I want to wake up in the White House with your help, making it my mission to do everything I can to give every person, and particularly every child, the chance to live up to his or her God-given potential. If you will stand with me, if you will work with me over the next two weeks, let's go out and build the kind of future we want for ourselves, for our kids, and let's prove once and for all that love trumps hate. Thank you all very much. It is great to be back in western Michigan. Thank you. Are there any Lakers here? Oh, my gosh. I am so thrilled to be here. I want to thank the president of this great university, Tom Haas, the faculty, the staff, the students. I want to thank Brandon Dillon, the Chair of the Michigan Democratic Party. And I especially really want to thank you for sending Debbie Stabenow to the United States Senate. I have also the great personal experience and privilege of having worked with Debbie, gotten to know her, become a friend of hers, and I am so excited at the possibility that I'll be able to work with her again. But I want you to know this - and I really, really hope you'll tell folks, because there is no more dedicated, effective member of the United States Senate than Debbie Stabenow. She fights for all of you every day, but she does it with that smile that never leaves her face. And she brings people together who are on opposite sides of issues because she just keeps talking. And don't we need more of that in Washington where people actually talk and listen to each other. So it's wonderful to be with all of you and to be introduced by Debbie. Are you ready to vote tomorrow, Michigan? Are you ready to help get your friends to vote tomorrow? That is clearly the right answer because we have a really important election tomorrow. The choice in this election could not be clearer. And I know that for many people, you've gone back and forth, you've thought about what to do, and I really respect that. But let me say this. Let me say this. This election is basically between division and unity in our country. It's between strong and steady leadership or a loose cannon who could put everything at risk. It is between an economy that works for everyone or one that is even more stacked for those at the top. And I want each and every one of you to be thinking through about all the issues that you care about. Because although my name and my opponents name will be on the ballot, those issues, and those values, are on the ballot as well. And as you think about what you care about and what you want your future to look like you have to recognize this is a consequential election. I have been privileged to know a lot of our presidents over the past decades, and people who ran for president. I was privileged to know as a college student, Gerald Ford. In fact, I had an internship with the House Republican Conference Committee, which he headed, after my junior year in college. So when I say I've gotten to know a lot of our presidents, and people who've run for president, it goes back a ways. And here's what I want you to understand. I didn't agree with everything they did or said. Even the Democrats. We had differences and politics and policies and sometimes on principle, but I never doubted, I never doubted that they were fit to serve as our president and commander-in-chief. That's why this election is so different. And it's why so many Republicans have spoken out to endorse me and support me, and who have taken very courageous stands against the nominee of their own party. Because they believe that we must put country ahead of party when it comes to this election. I was at Kent State, in Ohio, last week and I was introduced by a gentleman by the name of Bruce Blair. And Mr. Blair had served in the Air Force, he was a young officer assigned to be what was called a launch officer. That meant he served his time every day sitting in a bunker where the controls for launching nuclear weapons were housed. And his job - imagine the responsibility. A young Air Force officer in his twenties, waiting to hear whether or not an order is given for him to launch nuclear weapons. And Bruce Blair explained that there is no appeal from a president's order to do that. The joint chiefs of our military forces can't say, "No, don't do it." There's no veto from Congress or anyone else. And the time between the order being given and the actual launch is four minutes. So after watching this election Mr. Blair began contacting others who had served in this incredibly responsible position to share his concerns about what he was hearing and seeing. And several dozen of them - I'd never met them before - several dozen of them wrote a letter explaining why they could never support Donald Trump to be our commander-in-chief. The awesome responsibility that is housed in one person is something I want you to think about between now and the time you vote. Because I will pledge to you that I will exercise the greatest care and responsibility in all of the powers invested in the office of the presidency. I also want to pose to you a contrast in visions. Did any of you see the debates? First of all, I did stand for four and a half hours with Donald Trump on the stage, proving conclusively I have the stamina to be president. But I have to say, in addition to that, there were so many things that he said that of course I sometimes was surprised by. But the theme that ran through much of his rhetoric was the presentation of a dark and divisive vision for America. Now I have to tell you, I know we've got problems. I've spent 18 months traveling around our country talking to - by now - hundreds and hundreds of thousands of people, hearing what's on people's minds. We've got challenges but America's always had challenges. And since when do we become pessimistic and not able to think about what we can do to overcome those challenges and solve those problems together? I often didn't recognize the country that Donald Trump was describing. Because from my perspective, looking back at our history, we have a tremendous opportunity ahead of us. And you can vote for a hopeful, inclusive, big-hearted America that will set the stage for an even better future. And I want to say especially to the students who are here - I really believe that America's best days are still ahead of us if we reach for them together. Make no mistake. Our core values are being tested in this election. But my faith in our future has never been stronger. Last night in Manchester, New Hampshire, I was introduced by Mr. Khizr Khan. Some of you know or remember that his son, Captain Khan, serving in the United States Army, was killed serving in Iraq. And like at the Democratic Convention this summer, he spoke powerfully about what America means to him. And how we have to defend our values and our Constitution that are the envy of the rest of the world. People look at us with yearning. They see that we are a beacon of freedom, hope and opportunity for people, right here, at home. When I heard Mr. Khan speak at the convention, and I heard him again last night, I was so touched because what he said exhibited a love of our country. He said that when he started hearing Donald Trump speak, and all of the things he said about so many people, not only Muslims but African-Americans and Latinos and POWs and women and so many people - when he heard it he couldn't help but think as he walked around his house - he has a room where his son's medals - he got the Bronze Star, he got the Purple Heart - the flag that was draped on his coffin - is respectfully presented in the box that he was given it in. And he thought to himself, "Would there be any room for my son in Donald Trump's America?" Think about that for a minute. Because every single one of us has something to contribute. To this great country. We are already great but we can be greater. And we will be greater. I love our country and I believe in the American people, and I know there is nothing we can't do when we make up our minds. Throughout our history, generations of Americans have risen together to meet the tests of their time. They defended democracy. They built the greatest middle class the world has ever known. They marched for civil rights and voting rights, for workers' rights and union rights, for LGBT rights, rights for people with disabilities. And now, now we've got to come together and we have to prove we can meet the chal-lenges of our time. We've got to get the economy working for everybody, not just those at the top. If you believe, as I do, that America thrives when the middle class thrives, then you have to vote tomorrow.  We are going to make the biggest investment in good paying jobs since World War II. Jobs in infrastructure. Our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports, our airports, our water systems. These are jobs we need doing in American and these are jobs that cannot be exported. They've got to be done right here in Michigan and across our country. And we are going to invest in new jobs in advanced manufacturing. I am not one of these folks who think, "We just can't make it in America anymore." And I'll tell you why. Because if we have a plan and we actually commit to fulfilling that plan, we can lead the world in precision machining, in 3-D printing. We're not competing for low-wage jobs, we're competing with Germany for high manufacturing, high- skilled jobs. And we are going to have clean, renewable energy jobs as a way to fight climate change. As you heard, my opponent chose to make many of his products overseas. And as I pointed out in the last debate, he buys cheap Chinese steel and aluminum instead of good American steel, made by American steel workers. He's gone all over this country, and he's gone all over Michigan, talking about how he's gonna really get more jobs and he's going to bring back what used to be there. Well I'll tell you what. Look at his record, don't just listen to his rhetoric. Because I have a different idea. We're going to invest in America again. And for every-body who is frustrated, and anxious, and maybe even angry because they feel left out, left behind, that America's not working the way it should - I understand that. I under-stand that. I represented upstate New York for eight years, and I saw first hand a lot of the loss of jobs and factories, picking up and moving out. But I also realized that anger is not a plan. You've got to come together and figure out what is it we're gonna do to bring new jobs back and create more opportunity for people. And I'll just tell you that I believe that we've got to defend the American worker's right to organize and bargain for better wages and benefits. We're gonna get incomes rising here in western Michigan and across this state. And we're also gonna do more to help small business. My dad was a small businessman. He worked really hard. He ran a printing plant that printed fabrics for draperies, and I would from time to time help him out. You take a silkscreen, you put it down on the long table, you pour the paint in, you do the squeegee, you pick it up - it wasn't automated, we were the automaters - and you'd go all the way down to one table, you'd go to the other table. So I know how hard people in small business work. And I also know something else. Donald Trump made a lot of money off the backs of small business people and contractors by stiffing them and refusing to pay his bills. And I have said, "I am sure glad my dad never got a contract from Donald Trump, because we could not have afforded that." But it's not just enough to grow the economy. We have to make it fairer. And if you believe we need a fairer economy then you have to vote. I think the best antidote for whatever ails a person is a good job. I believe in hard work. That's how I was raised. But I also believe that if you work hard and you work full time you shouldn't still be in poverty at the end of the year. And I'm gonna raise the national minimum wage. And one of the things I've heard all over America, especially from young families, really from all families but particularly young families, is how hard it is to do so many of the things that are expected - like where do you find affordable quality childcare? In lots of states, it's more expensive than college tuition. We're gonna get the cost of childcare down. We're going to have a paid family leave program so that when you have a sick relative or you're sick you won't lose your job. I saw the folks over there holding up the Tim Kaine sign and I really appreciate that. Thank you. Thank you. I got to tell you - Tim and I were in Pittsburgh last month, with a big crowd, and we couldn't get everybody in, like today, so Tim went out to say hello to people and he saw a woman holding a baby, probably about three years old. And he stopped to talk to her and she said, "I came here because I wanted to tell you, and to tell Hillary Clinton, what happened to me." She said that, "I had my baby, it was a hard labor and delivery and I needed some time off. And I called by boss and said the doctors want me to take some time off and so I won't be in for - I think she said two weeks - and they said, "OK. You're fired." That is legal in America, still. And what that does is to say that - wait a minute, do we really value children? Do we really value families? And we've got to have a system that is fair to employers and fair to employees because you got to be able to balance work and family in today's America. And then finally, I think it is way past time to guarantee equal pay for women's work. And you know I gotta say - this always gets a huge round of applause, as you can tell - but this is not just a woman's issue. It's a family issue. If you have a wife, a mother, a sister, a daughter, who's in the work force, you want her to be paid what she deserves to be paid to help you and your family. Just about everything I've said so far my opponent disagrees with. And whenever I talk about affordable childcare, and paid family leave, and equal pay - he says I'm playing the woman's card and you know what I say, if that's the case? Then deal me in. And here's what else I want you to know. It's fair to ask, "How are you going to pay for that?" That's not only fair, that's necessary to ask. Because I want to be a good steward of your tax dollars just as I expect you're a good steward of your family budget. I have proposed a very simple formula. I will not raise taxes on anyone making less than $250,000 a year. And for small businesses, we're gonna cut your taxes because I know a lot of small businesses need that kind of tax relief. So instead, we're going where the money is, to the millionaires and the billionaires and the big corporations. And that is in stark contrast to what Donald Trump has proposed. His whole economic plan is cut trillions of dollars in taxes from millionaires and billionaires and corporations. That is trickle-down economics on steroids. I profoundly disagree. I think the way you build an economy is from the middle out and the bottom up, not from the top down. When you think about it, Donald hasn't paid anything for 20 years. He's paid zero to support our military, our vets, Pell grants for students here at Grand Valley, our high-ways - and I am still pondering, I am just pondering how anybody can lose a billion dollars in one year. Especially when you're running casinos. I do not understand that. But that will be one of the mysteries in this campaign because he's not going to release his tax returns now and the time you start voting. And that sort of suggests there must be something really terrible in those tax returns because everybody else for more than 40 years has released them. So, we'll still wonder. But what we know is his economic approach will cost us jobs, not create jobs. And we can't afford that. We need to keep building. We have recovered from the worst financial crash since the Great Depression but we're not where we need to be yet. The last thing we need is a failed economic policy coming back in and pushing us back down. And depriving people of the jobs that we want to create. And if you believe all of our kids should have good schools and good teachers no matter what zip code they live in then you have to vote. And if you believe college should be affordable you have to vote. I've got to say I am proud of the campaign that Bernie Sanders and I ran. It was a campaign about ideas and issues, not insults. And when it was over, we actually got together. What a novel idea. We wanted to figure out how we can work together to actually produce on some of the goals that we both shared. So Bernie and I worked on this plan together. Public colleges and universities should be tuition-free for everyone who makes less than a $125,000 a year. And they should be debt-free for everyone else because nobody should go into debt. And if you have gone into debt, if you're among the millions of Americans who are struggling - as I see some hands pointing in the air - paying back your student debt, we are going to help you pay it down and pay it off. It makes no sense at all. We have interest rates that are really low right now. Buy a car for what, 1 or 2 percent. You can buy a house for 3,4 percent. There are so many people who are paying 8, 10, 12, higher - 8, 10, 12 percent interest - how much? Twelve point seven. Fourteen point one. I got to tell you friends. That is outrageous. The federal government should not be making money off of sending kids to college. I can't wait to roll up my sleeves with Debbie and Bernie and we're gonna get to work right after this election if I am fortunate enough to win. Look. Working for children and families has been the cause of my life, but it's never been more important than it is right now. And that has to be our mission together. Doing all we can to help every American, and especially every young American and every child in America to have the chance to live up to their God-given potential. I will wake up every single day in the White House trying to figure out what I can do to make that a reality for you. So after tomorrow the work will begin, and one of the highest priorities that I feel an obligation to address is how we bring our country together. A lot of people say we've got to heal our country, or as the Bible says repair the breach. Because we have so much divisiveness right now. We've got to start listening to each other. Respecting each other. I know it is unusual, I admit, for somebody running for president, especially the day before an election, but I've been saying this for months. To say that we need more of two things right now. We need more love and kindness in America. I don't know about you, I don't know about you but I bet everyone of us has received a kindness and maybe, I hope, we've all extended one. I am standing here today because my mother, who was abandoned by her parents, rejected by her grandparents, went to work at the age of 14 as a maid, and a babysitter, was extended kindness. Not by those who should have loved her, but by others. The first grade teacher who saw she had nothing to eat at lunch, who began bringing extra food. The woman whose house she went to work in who knew that my mother wanted to go to high school. She would have been a freshman in high school when she had to leave her grandparents' home and she got this job. And that woman said, "I know you want to go to high school. If you get up early and you get your chores done, you can go to high school, but you'll have to come back because we'll need you in the late afternoon." Now that may sound harsh to say to a 14-year old but to my mother it was a gift. I tell you this because we all have to start thinking about how we want to be treated and what that means about how we treat others. And ... There's a version of the golden rule in every major religion. And it is a reminder that every one of us gets knocked down. The question as my mother would say is are you gonna get back up? And for people in our country who feel like they've been knocked down and nobody cares, nobody's paying attention, here's what I want you to know. If you give me the honor of being your president I'm gonna do everything I can to get this country and everybody in it back up on our feet moving forward together. Because I want to be a president for all Americans. Democrats, Republicans, Independents. Not just the people who support me, everybody in this country. Because I believe with all my heart each of us has a role to play in building a better future. So let's take that first step tomorrow. If you don't know where you're supposed to vote go to iwillvote.com - you can get all the information you need. If you want to help us bringing out the vote here in western Michigan in the last 24, 36 hours, you can still sign up to volunteer. Go to hillaryclinton.com. Or you can text join247246 or stop by one of our offices. We would be really excited to see you, because when your kids and grandkids ask what you did in 2016, when everything was on the line, I hope you'll be able to say that you voted for a better, stronger, fairer America. An America where we build bridges, not walls.And an America where we prove that yes, love trumps hate.  Thank you all so much. I want to thank Leslie Pearce for that introduction and her lifelong work on behalf of children. I want to thank State Representative Dwayne Taylor and Mayor Derrick Henry for being here with us. And to all of the elected officials, all of the organizers and the volunteers, I am thrilled to have this chance to come by and talk with you for a few minutes about what's at stake in this election because this may be one of the most important elections in our lifetimes. And we cannot take anything or anyone for granted. I was just over at BCU for their homecoming celebration. And a lot of people told me they had already voted, but I said, 'Get your friends. Get your family. Get everybody you know to vote' because you've got early voting here in this county, in Volusia County, until November 5th. No excuses. Everybody's got to get out and vote. And that's what this canvass is meant to make sure we do. Right? Now, I'm sure that some of you may have heard about a letter that the FBI director sent out yesterday. Well, if you're like me, you probably have a few questions about it. It is pretty strange. It's pretty strange to put something like that out with such little information right before an election. In fact, in fact, it's not just strange. It's unprecedented. And it is deeply troubling because voters deserve get to full and complete facts. And so we've called on Director Comey to explain everything right away, put it all out on the table. Right? Now, of course, Donald Trump is already making up lies about this. He is doing his best to confuse, mislead, and discourage the American people. I think it's time for Donald Trump to stop fear mongering, to stop disgracing himself, to stop attacking our democracy. We can't let him get away with this, can we? Now, like any campaign, there have been ups and downs and ups and downs, but I've got to tell you I feel so motivated, so excited, so ready because I've always stayed focused on one thing: you and your families. What I worry about are the problems that keep you up at night, and I'm going to stay focused on that, because you know on November 9th that's what's going to matter. We can't let this election in the last 10 days be about the noise and the distractions. It's got to be about what kind of country we want for ourselves, our children, and our grandchildren ... and who can help take us there as your president.  [ "</i>]  Now, I think you and I agree the choice is pretty clear between a president who's ready to bring us together, keep us safe, and make the economy work for everyone, not just those at the top, and someone who is temperamentally unfit and totally unqualified for the job. Now, I promise you this: I will never stop working for you every single day as a candidate and most importantly as your president. That's how I was raised. When I was over at B-CU I met one of the Methodist ministers because B-CU is affiliated with the Methodist Church, and I felt right at home. And my mother ... my mother taught me to never, ever quit. Now what does that mean? Well, that means everybody gets knocked down. What matters is whether you get back up. And I've been fighting for families and underdogs my entire life, and I'm not stopping now. We're just getting started. And let's always remember what our wonderful First Lady told us: 'When they go low, we go high.' So no matter what they throw at us in these last days, we're not going to back down. We're not going to get distracted. We're not going to get knocked off course. Because we know how much the election matters. We know how many people are counting on us. And that's why we're going to reject Donald Trump's dark and divisive vision about America. We are going to stick together and we are going to win on November the 8th. Right? Because Donald Trump's strategy is pretty simple. They've even said it in his campaign. It's to get women to stay home, get young people to stay home, get people of color to stay home, and get a lot ... get a lot of smart, intelligent men to stay home too. Now, this is all part of his scorched earth campaign. It goes against everything we stand for. And you know how we stop him? By showing up with the biggest turnout of voters in American history. We need more of everybody to vote ... more women, more young people, more people of color, more African Americans, more Latinos, everybody. Let's break every record that we've ever had for voting. Let's make that the story of this election. And here in Florida you can, as you often have, make the difference. Right, Florida? If you all vote and you get everybody you know to vote, if you go out and talk to people today and every day about what's at stake in this election, then we will make history. We will win up and down the ballot. And I feel strongly about this, because we need people in Washington who are problem-solvers, not problem-makers. That's why I hope you'll vote to send Patrick Murphy to the Senate. He will be an independent voice for Florida families. And this is important: Unlike his opponent, Patrick has never been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump. Now, here's some really good news. We just reached a milestone. More than 200 million Americans are registered to vote. That is the highest number ever. And that includes 50 million young people. That's the most in history. And you know what else? More than 16.5 million people have already voted in this election. And more than 3 million of those votes have been right here in Florida. Now, you only see numbers like we're seeing here in Florida when people are standing up for what they really believe in. Americans are coming together, and I know because I hear from people who are Republicans and Independents who are joining us to reject hate and division, rejecting Donald Trump's demeaning treatment of women, his plans to break up immigrant families and deport millions of people, his lie that President Obama wasn't born in America. I'll tell you, we have learned who Donald Trump is. Now it's up to us to show who we are. And the energy that we are seeing is not just about what we're against, it's about what we're for. It's about a common vision that we share for a hopeful, dynamic, unified America where everyone counts, everyone has a place, everyone willing to work can get ahead and stay ahead, where women are respected ... where veterans are honored, where workers are paid fairly, where marriage is a right and discrimination is wrong. So my friends, it is not just the fact that my name will be on the ballot. Everything we care about is at stake ... your future ... making college affordable, helping you pay back your debt ... the cost of prescription drugs down ... protecting and defending Social Security and Medicare from privatization and Wall Street schemes. Fighting climate change is at stake. LGBT equality is at stake. Equal pay for women is at stake. In the end, we know that American dream itself is at stake. Now, did any of you see the debates?"   But I have to tell you, he said a lot of things that were troubling. But in that last debate, he said something that was truly horrifying. He is the first person of a major party, Republican or Democrat, ever to refuse to say he would respect the outcome of the election. Now, we can think about every issue we care about, but you know, after attacking women and African Americans and Latinos and people with disabilities and Muslims and POWs and everybody, now he's attacking the institutions of democracy. And so it comes down to this. When your kids and grandkids ask, 'What did you do in the 2016 election when everything was on the line,' I want you to be able to say you voted for a better, fairer, stronger America. And the way we're going to do that: We're going to turn everybody out. Early voting has begun right here in Volusia County. Every day from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. until November 5th you can vote. The nearest early voting site is just one mile away from here at the Volusia County Library Center in City Island. So don't wait one more day. Go vote, and then help us get everybody else out to vote too. Now, I know ... I know that we've got our canvass organizers up here. I don't want to take too much of their time because they are workers, they are organized, they are focused. I'm so grateful to them and to you, and we need you. We need you. Stakes couldn't be higher. We got to do everything we can. I don't want anybody waking up on November 9th and saying, 'Oh, I wish I had just done a little more.' So help us knock on doors, make phone calls, talk to voters, and ask them, 'When are you going to vote? Do you know where you're going to cast your ballot? Who will you take with you?' And make sure they know about early voting, already begun here in Florida. And then if you need to, sign up yourselves. We have signups for three more shifts between now and Election Day. And this is going to be a close election; they always are these days. And we're going to win because of you, because of hardworking volunteers like you. And if you know anybody thinking about voting for Donald Trump, stage an intervention. Remember, friends don't let friends vote for Trump. And think about it this way. On January 20th, we're going to have a new president. And I'll tell you what, I will be proud to build on the progress we've made under President Obama and go even further. But I can't do any of the things that I'm talking about, any of the plans that I have, unless you help me. So that's what I'm asking you. That's why I came to Daytona Beach today. I came to ask you to help me in these last ten days. Let's give every American a chance to chart their own future, make their own contributions. Let's build a future we can all be proud of, and let's make sure we prove once and for all that love trumps hate.  Thank you. This was Secretary Clinton's first campaign speech after FBI director James Comey reopened the investigation into Clinton's private email server. Thank you. Thank you. I -- I got to -- I got to say, after hearing -- after hearing from these two extraordinary men I -- I feel all fired up and ready to go for the next five days. It is so great to be back here with all of you, and there are a few people in the audience that I just want to acknowledge because I'm delighted they're there -- U.S. Congressman David Price I saw right there.Thank you, David. State Senator Dan Blue Jr., I know, right there. Thank you, Dan.And I'm not sure she's still here, but Deborah Ross, who I hope is your next senator. There she is! Because everything Pharrell and Bernie just said is not only about the presidential election and what's at stake, it is about who's going to represent you as your governor, as your senator, as members of Congress and the legislature, and you have some excellent candidates. And we are so hopeful that you will vote for them and vote for what they represent. Now, I really want to thank my friend, Bernie Sanders, for everything that he has done. I -- I got to serve with Bernie. We were colleagues in the Senate. I saw firsthand his commitment to the people of Vermont and to the values that have guided his life. And when we faced each other in the primary, here's what I was so proud about. We ran a campaign on the issues that matter to the American people. And I -- I think because of that campaign, we were able to raise a lot of the issues that you heard Bernie talking about to the level that they are part of this presidential cam-paign, and they will be part of our agenda after January 20th, Bernie. And I've got to say, too, this election has been a lot more fun now that we're on the same side. And I want to thank Bernie for everything he's done. He's crisscrossing our country, energizing people, getting folks off the sidelines and engaged in politics. And there's no question that his efforts are paying off. And what he said at the beginning of his remarks is absolutely true. My name may be on the ballot, but it is not about me, it's not about my opponent, it's not about Bernie, it's not about David or Deborah, it is about you and your lives and what we're going to do together. Now, Bernie and I have already worked, we've worked on the plan that he told you about to make college tuition-free for the middle-class, for working families, for poor kids and debt-free for everyone. Because as Bernie said earlier this year, when people who care about progressive causes stand together, we win, and then we can get to work on making those causes into realities for the lives of our people. So I am proud to be here with you and I am so excited about -- of the election, about everything that we're going to do together. And I'm especially pleased to have Pharrell here. Now, every time I see him, which is not often enough, we always have a good conversation like we did before this event. He always gets you to think. Not only is he a world-class talent, but he is a passionate advocate for issues that are too often overlooked and ignored. He wants to -- and I'm going to do everything I can help him -- to deliver -- giving kids who are at risk access to educational and arts programs that they deserve to have just as much as any other child. So tell me this, tell me this, North Carolina, tell me, North Carolina, are you really, really, really happy that we're here tonight? Well, we sure are. There's nowhere we'd rather be.Now, let me ask you this, how many of you have already voted?Well, I hope you're going to bring more people to vote as well, right?Are you ready to volunteer? We can all use you in these last days. Are you ready to elect Roy Cooper? Well, I'm glad to hear that because it's time you had a governor who puts families first, not radical ideology.And I love seeing our educators stand up and applaud because you need a governor who actually cares about the education of the children of North Carolina. Now, are you ready to elect Deborah Ross to the United States Senate? I'll tell you -- I'll tell you, Deborah and her race are the talk of everywhere. People know she will be an independent voice for North Carolina families, that she will represent you with integrity and excellence. And unlike her opponent, she's never been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump. Are you ready now to choose our next president and commander-in- chief? Well, I'm -- I'm excited. Did any of you see the debates?Well, you know, there's several -- there's several notable aspects of those debates. I mean, one is the very fact that I stood on the stage for four and a half hours with my opponent proving, once and for all, I have the stamina to be president and commander-in-chief. But you know -- but you know, he -- he also kept saying, like oh, well you know, what have you done for the last 30 years? And you know, occasionally I would interject and say what I had done. And today, in Greenville, we had a perfect comparison. I started my career fighting for children and families with the Children's Defense Fund when I got right out of law school in the 1970's. I went to South Carolina to gather evidence to stop the government in South Carolina for -- from putting young men, teenagers in jails with adults. I went to Alabama undercover to gather information about segregated academies to deprive them of tax-exempt status, which they did not deserve. I went door-to-door in New Bedford, Massachusetts, gathering information to make the case that every child in America, including children with disabilities, should have the right to a public school education. And as we heard this morning from a -- just a wonderful, distinguished older woman by the name of Mae Wiggins who came all the way down to tell her story. She was a nurse in New York City back in the 1970's, excited about being a young nurse, getting her career off to a start. And she was looking for a place to live, and she had a budget like everybody does. And she found what she thought would be the perfect place. It was within her budget. It was close to work. She went to apply for an apartment. It was a new building -- brand new building. It wasn't even totally finished yet. She went into the little office and asked for an application and they said, "Oh, we don't have any apartments." She said, "But I saw the advertisement." "Well, we have no apartments left." Well, she thought that was pretty peculiar and so she decided to do a little investigation and she found out that all of her African- American friends who had gone to that apartment run by Donald Trump and his father, Fred, had been told there were no apartments. So she had the gumption to go and make a complaint, which led to the Justice Depart-ment suing them for discrimination. They settled the suit, but then they had to come back a year later and sue them again because they were still discriminating. So when you hear, as Bernie so powerfully said at the end of his remarks, that we are standing against the possibility of returning and normalizing discrimination, take it seriously, my friends, because it truly is -- it truly is at stake in this election. And I was also very, very grateful. I had a role in helping to create the Children's Health Insurance Program as first lady, and let me tell you, one of the great -- one of the great honors as I travel across the country is meeting young people who are the beneficiaries or meeting their families. I met a woman here in North Carolina who told her story and we actually recorded it because all of us were so moved by what she had to say when her baby was born. Her daughter, she was deaf. And the doctors all said she'll never -- she'll never communicate, so she cannot learn to speak, so you need to teach her sign language. And the mom did all this research and concluded that there were some treatments that might help her daughter, but she didn't have that kind of money. They didn't have that kind of insurance. And she was telling her doctor she didn't know what to do, and the doctor just serendipitously said, "You know, there's this new program, it's called the Children's Health Insurance Program. It's for people who are not poor, but they don't make enough money to afford that kind of insurance, and they don't work for an employer who provides it. You should look into it." And she did. And that began the process of her getting the treatment that her daughter needed. And when I met the mother, I also met the daughter, right here. I talked with her. She told me how proud she was because she had just graduated from college, George Washington University. So, yes, you know, I do sweat the details and I do have a lot of plans. Tim Kaine and I put a whole book out called "Stronger Together" telling you exactly what we're going to try to do if we're fortunate enough to be president and vice president because I actually think it's important for you to know what we're going to do together. And as your -- as a senator, I helped to rebuild New York City after 9/11 and provided health care to our brave first responders. As your secretary of state, I traveled to 112 countries, negotiated cease-fires, reduced the threat of nuclear weapons, stood up for human rights and women's rights and LGBT rights all around the world. And you know, everything I've done started by listening to people. Listening to hear your stories, what you're worried about, and then working to bring people together to find common ground, even with people who disagreed with me on lots of issues. You know, when I was first lady, I had a great commitment to kids in foster care and I wanted to improve our foster care and adoption laws, and I was looking for some Re-publican to work with me, and I found one because I did my research and found out that one of the most partisan Republicans, Congressman Tom DeLay from Texas, had a heart for children in foster care. He and his wife had fostered children, and I called him up. I said, "Congressman, would you work with me to change the laws on foster care and adoption?" There was a silence. He said, "Well, what do you want me to do?" I said, "Well, come to the White House. Come to a meeting. We'll sit down and figure out what we can do." And we did, and I meet those kids, and I meet those families, kids who were taken out of foster care and given the chance to have a loving permanent family for the first time. Now, I'm telling you this because I really believe that's the only way we're going to get things done. And if you elect me next Tuesday, that is the kind of president I will be. So, let me just mention a few of the ideas that we've been putting forward to help you and your families get ahead and stay ahead because I truly believe you need a candidate you can vote for, not just someone to vote against. But as you're making this choice, we need to be clear about what the choice is, because come January 20th, America will have a new president. It will either be me or my opponent. Now, I think it's fair to say, things are going to change. Change is part of life. That much is certain. The question is what kind of change are we going to see? Are we going to build a stronger, fairer, better America or are we going to fear each other and fear our future? I want you just to imagine, imagine the different kinds of futures that are available depending upon who's elected on January 20th, because by imagining it, I want you to think about every issue you care about, everything that is dear to you, everything that you heard from Pharrell and from Bernie. It's hard for me to imagine that we would have a president who has demeaned women, mocked the disabled, insulted African-Americans and Latinos, pitted people against each other instead of bringing them together. That is, unfortunately though, what we have seen in this campaign, what we have seen, what's been said and how distressful it's been. I know there are a lot of people who are upset about what's going on in this campaign, aren't there? People come and talk to me. I've had people say that they can't sleep, that their stomachs are bothering them, they have headaches. And I think that's an im-portant signal because this is a big decision. And as Michelle Obama has said, the presidency doesn't change you -- who you are, it reveals who you are. And I think it's fair to say that my opponent has already revealed who he is. And he wants to ban every Muslim in the world from coming to the United States. Our country is founded on religious freedom. It is one of the most important building blocks of our democracy. He has said that he thinks the lives of black people are all crime and poverty and des-pair. He has no idea -- no idea about the strength of the black church, the vibrancy of black-owned businesses, the excellence of historically black colleges and universities. He seems not to recognize the rise of a new generation of black activists for social justice and the success of black leaders in every field. And we saw that again in the way he treated the Central Park Five. These were five black and Latino kids, some as young as 14, who were wrongly convicted of a terrible crime in New York City back in 1990. Donald Trump took out full-page ads in four newspapers calling for the death penalty for these kids. Nearly three decades later, they were exonerated by DNA evidence. And in addition, someone else confessed to the crime, so they were finally released from prison. But not only did Trump refuse to apologize for what he had said about them and even calling for their executions, he actually said, "They should still be in prison." Evidence didn't matter. The law didn't matter. To him, those kids would always be guilty. So think about it, if he wants to keep exonerated people in jail, how can we trust him to fight for the rule of justice and fairness and criminal justice reform in America? Do we want him appointing our judges?     And right now, people across our country are coming together to do just that. They are rejecting the dark and divisive vision for one that is more hopeful and inclusive. We know that America is big-hearted, not small-minded. We want to lift people up, not tear each other down. And that's why I do believe we are stronger together, so let me paint you a different picture. Here's what we're going to do together. We're going to take on systemic racism with a full commitment and real follow-through because we refuse to accept as normal some of what we're seeing across America. What happened to that church in Mississippi yesterday should not have happened and it should never be accepted. People painted the words "Vote Trump" on the side and then set it on fire. Who would do that? Who would do that to a place of worship where people seek solace? That can never be normal. It can never be acceptable. What happened in Flint, Michigan, as Bernie said, can never be normal, can never be acceptable. Little children drinking and bathing in poisoned water that will affect their health for years to come. And then we know, don't we? Too many young African-Americans are dying in police incidents or because of gun violence. We know their names; Trayvon Martin and Eric Garner and Sandra Bland and Keith Scott and so many others. We have got to face this, and we're going to get to work to do just that. We are going to - we are going to dismantle the so-called school-to-prison pipeline and we're going to replace it with a cradle-to-college pipeline. And we're going to start with our youngest kids and their families to give them the support that they need. And we're going to take a hard look at what we need to do to make sure every child has the chance to attend good schools with good teachers, no matter what their ZIP code is. And we will reform our criminal justice system from end-to-end. It is wrong, my friends, that black men are far more likely to be stopped by police, charged and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men for the same offenses. When I -- when I launched this campaign back in April of 2015, the very first speech I gave was on the topic of criminal justice reform. I said then and I have repeated it throughout this campaign, we must end the era of mass incarceration. Too many families have been broken up, too many communities have been so badly affected. We have to reform these mandatory minimums and sentencing. We have to ban the box so people who have served their time can get a real chance at a good job and a fresh start. And we have to restore trust between police and communities. We are all safer when everyone has respect for the law and everyone is respected by the law. This is important, of course, to families and communities, but it is important to all of us. This is about who we are as a country, about whether we really are a nation that believes in freedom and justice for all. Too often, despite the progress we've made, we fall short of that goal, and we have to be honest about it. I am determined to make this one of the most important projects of my presidency and I hope all of you will join me in doing that. And I have to say - I have to say that is only part of what must be done because the leading cause of death for young African-American men, more than the next nine causes. We have 33,000 people a year dying from guns. I just cannot tolerate this any longer. I have met the families of those who have lost loved ones, who have lost the first graders in Sandy Hook, the bible study churchgoers in Charleston, the club-goers in Orlando, the moviegoers in Aurora, Colorado, people going about their lives being cut down and cut senselessly short. We have to take steps to reduce gun violence, and I know we can do that because the vast majority of Americans agree something must be done and a very big majority of gun owners agree as well. And we've got to make investments in those communities that are struggling, especially communities of color. When I was in eastern North Carolina today and I was talking to people there who had been devastated by Hurricane Matthew, people who didn't have very much to start with, who lost everything, farmers with 100, 200 acres growing sweet potatoes, wiped out. We've got to help everybody get ahead. I believe that the economy must work for everyone, not just those at the top. And I think hardworking Americans deserve a raise and women deserve equal pay. So, how are we going to do this? Well, we're going to go where the money is. Just as Bernie said, we're going to make the wealthy pay their fair share, and make sure Wall Street never threatens Main Street again. And I can't wait to work with Bernie to make public colleges and universities like N.C. State right here at Raleigh tuition-free. I know that this is another issue Pharrell feels passionately about as well. If you're struggling with student debt, we're going to cut that and help you pay it back and get out from under it. And in my plan is a $25 billion fund specifically aimed at supporting historically black colleges and universities - schools like Shaw and Saint Augustine - because you know they produce some of the finest leaders in our country, and I want to make sure they keep doing that vital work. So we could go on all night. I mean, Bernie and I could really keep you here until breakfast because we get excited about what we can do. But of course, we can't do anything if you don't get out and vote and get everybody you know to vote. This is going to be one of the most consequential elections in our country's history, you know that, because we are at a crossroads. It's not just who my opponent is. Pharrell is right, we don't even have to mention his name very much. Right? It's not just about him, although there are some special features that certainly raise deep concerns. It's about who we are. It's about what we want, what we're going to do to make our mark on our country at this time in our history. I believe -- I believe America's best days are still ahead of us if we do what we're sup-posed to do. Every social movement, every economic advance has only come about because people were willing to work and sacrifice and keep pushing forward in the face of adversity. It's not easy. It wasn't easy to get the vote for women. It wasn't easy to have the final efforts made to ensure that the Civil Rights Act was enforced. It wasn't easy because there are powerful interests still trying to push us back and push us down. And right now, you know, because in this state a lot of effort was put into trying to suppress the vote, right? And some people got discouraged about that. I've met some people who say, well, you know, I don't even know what they want, what kind of identification. It gets a little discouraging. You cannot get discouraged. Do not grow weary while doing good, right? It is now our turn -- our turn to stand up to people like your governor and your legislature who wanted to shut you down and push you back because we are fundamentally a good nation and we need to make sure we deliver on that promise. And in this election, President Obama's entire legacy is on the line, everything that he has worked so hard to do against implacable opposition. As the president said yesterday, everything we've done is dependent upon him being able to pass the baton to somebody who believes in the same things he believes in. So I got to tell you, I've told the president I'm ready to take the baton, but he's going to have to bend over because he's a lot taller than I am. But I'm not just taking it, all of us are taking it. We are ready to grab that baton, to defend and build upon the progress of his presidency, and that is why everyone must vote. Early vote and vote on Tuesday if you can't get to early vote.And listen to this, more than two million right here in North Carolina have already voted. So make no mistake about it, you can make the difference, not only in who you elect, but in the agenda that those people will then get to work on. I want you to hold me accountable. I want you to be my partners, but I can't do any of this. You know, when I was with our wonderful first lady last week, she reminded ...she reminded the big crowd we had in Winston-Salem that President Obama in 2008 won this state by about 14,000 votes.  If you break that down, you know what the difference between winning and losing is? Roughly two votes per precinct. So don't let anybody tell you their vote doesn't matter. You've got to get everyone you know to come out and vote. You can vote early through this Saturday, November 5th. If you don't know where to vote, go to iwillvote.com to confirm your voting location because the best way to repudiate the bigotry and the bluster and the bullying and the hateful rhetoric and discrimination is to show up with the biggest turnout in American history. And then that will be the story of this election. Let's make that one for the history books. Please be part of what we're doing in these next days and let's make sure that we not only have a future we can believe in, but one we can help create together, and demonstrate, once and for all, that love trumps hate.  Thank you all. Secretary Clinton was introduced by both Senator Bernie Sanders and Pharrell Williams. Williams is a Grammy award winning song-writer, rapper, and record producer. I am so, so grateful to Jos.. for that wonderful introduction. He's an incredibly talented chef, but more than that, I have to say he's a humanitarian. He just came back from Haiti, once again, where he goes periodically to help feed people. He's been doing it ever since the terrible earthquake, going to help people in remote villages ... and he does that all over the world when it comes to making sure that there are clean cookstoves so that people can cook, primarily women and children, without fear of getting sick from inhaling all the smoke. I enlisted Jos..'s help when I was Secretary of State on the clean cookstoves initiative. And as you heard, he's also a proud immigrant and ... he is standing up to Donald Trump's anti-immigrant rhetoric, and he's doing it in a very courageous way because he sacrificed his business. He'd been asked by the Trump Organization to put a restaurant into the new hotel that Trump was talking about on TV today, in Washington, and after Jos.. heard the kinds of things that Donald Trump was saying about immigrants, he said, 'No, I refuse to open a restaurant in that hotel.' That is really gutsy. And today was a perfect time to have Jos.. be with us because, as I said, Donald Trump is taking time off the campaign trail to officially open the hotel. And yesterday, here in Florida, he took time out to invite the press to listen to his employees talk about what a great boss he is while he was watching and listening to them.  And today, in opening that hotel, I think it's important to note that he once again relied on undocumented workers. The same people he has been insulting and demonizing throughout this campaign. So, like with so much else that Donald Trump says, he says one thing and then he does something different. Many of the products in the hotel were made overseas rather than here in the United States, and he even sued the District of Columbia to pay lower taxes. That is the way that he does business. Now, we've actually learned in this campaign that Donald Trump is the poster boy for everything wrong with our economy. He refuses to pay workers and contractors from Atlantic City to Miami to Las Vegas. He stiffs small businesses. I take that one personally because my dad was a small businessman. And I've met so many people who did projects for Donald Trump ... provided pianos for one of his casinos, installed drapes for one of his hotels, laid the marble, put in the glass, washed the dishes, painted ... and then weren't paid. I just think that is fundamentally wrong and that is not the kind of experience we need in the Oval Office. So I'm grateful to Jos.. and I want to thank everyone else ... my great friend, your United States Senator Bill Nelson. Congresswoman Kathy Castor. Mayor Bob Buckhorn, who's here with his two daughters. Governor Charlie Crist, soon to be Congressman Charlie Crist. I have to say, we've got two great candidates here: David Singer, candidate for the House of Representatives; and Rena Frazier, another candidate. And we have the great talent of Angela Bassett with us today. So, my friends, here's the advice that I got. It is a beautiful day in Tampa, but it's warm. And some of you have been here a while, right? And I'm watching the flags. So long as they're waving, I know there's a breeze. If they stop waving, I'm really going to cut this short. But let me start by thanking you ... thanking you for being here.  [ "</i>]  Thank you. Thank you. Well, I'll tell you, if I ever need a pickup, I'm coming back to Tampa, Mayor. And with 13 days left in this election, we cannot stop for a minute. No complacency here. Nobody... nobody flagging. We've got to get everybody out to vote. And I hope in addition to the people that I've mentioned, someone who's not here I hope you will support ... that is Congressman Patrick Murphy, to send him to the United States Senate.  I think you'll be pleased because he's an independent voice. He's a problem-solver. He believes in comprehensive immigration reform. He has stood with Planned Parenthood against the attacks that it has suffered. He has even brought Democrats and Republicans together to try to protect our environment and fund Everglades restoration. He'll stand up to the gun lobby and advocate for common sense gun safety measures. He'll defend Social Security and Medicare, not cutting or privatizing those two essential programs. So please, do your best to make sure we send Patrick Murphy to the Senate. Now, I got to ask you, anybody see the last debate? You know, I have now stood next to Donald Trump for four and a half hours, proving conclusively I have the stamina to do the job.  And every time he says one of those outrageous things that he does have a ... yeah, 'Wrong' ... he does have a way of saying, I just keep remembering Michelle Obama's words: when he goes low, we go high. But I got to say, he said something in the last debate we've never heard from anybody running for president. He basically said that he's not sure ... he refused to say that he would respect the results of the election. Now, this is a guy who said the Emmys were rigged, so you can't really take what he says very seriously. But this is a problem because the first thing a president does at noon on January 20th is to take an oath to preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution. And if you are casting doubts, you want to keep people in suspense as to whether you will respect the outcome of an election, that is contrary to who we are as Americans. We have our elections; we've had them from George Washington forward. We're going to keep having them and show what a democracy looks like to the rest of the world. I believe strongly that the American people are going to reject this dark, divisive vision of America, and it's happening, my friends. We have reached a milestone. More than 200 million Americans are registered to vote. That's the biggest number ever. And that number includes 50 million young people. And you know what else? More than 10 million people have already voted, including 2 million right here in Florida.  I'm hearing some great stories from people. Let me just tell you one. It's about Steven, from St. Augustine. He's been fighting a rare form of leukemia and heart disease. He's been in and out of the hospitals a dozen times in the last two years. But he knows how important his vote is. So I heard yesterday he ditched his oxygen tank, which I would not have recommended ... clung to his walker, stood in line so he could cast his vote for a better America. And if Steven can do that, nobody has any excuses. And I think this extends not just to Democrats but to Republicans and independents, and I am proud to have support from Republicans and independents here, across Florida, and across America who agree with me that we should reject hate and division. We have seen Donald Trump insult nearly every person in America, and I just find that so intolerable. Because look at this diverse crowd; look at Tampa. It's a cosmopolitan city. Florida is paving the way for what our country will look like, and we need to be lifting each other up, listening to each other, respecting each other, not sowing seeds of hatred and bigotry. And I think one of my biggest jobs after this election will be bringing our country together, and I'm going to need your help. We're going to get the economy working for everybody, not just people at the top, with new jobs in infrastructure. That rail system, Bob, that you want, we're going to get it because it would help you so much. Think of the people we'd put to work ... technology, innovation, research, advanced manufacturing, and yes, small business. I want to be the best small business president you can have, to help people start and grow their businesses. But we're also going to make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century. I know we can create millions of jobs, and we can protect Florida, especially coastal Florida, and we can protect our planet at the same time. You're already seeing the results of climate change here in Florida. I was just in Miami, and they actually have flooding on sunny days with no rain. People are calling 3-1-1 because they think a water main broke, but it's the oceans rising. So I know there is no state that could benefit more from a clean energy agenda than Florida, and that's exactly what we're going to do. We're also going to make public colleges and universities tuition-free. If your family makes less than $125,000, which is most families in America, you're not going to have to pay a penny to go to a public college or university. If your family makes more than that, you're not going to have to go into debt ... pay what you can afford, and then we're going to make sure you can go without getting a big debt, because that drags people down. And for people who already have debt, we are going to help you refinance it and pay it off. And I want to say something to all of the teachers and educators. I want to work with you and be a good partner with you. And I think there should be more than one way, more than just a four-year college degree, to get a good job with a good middle-class life for you and your families. So let's invest in more technical education in high school, in our community colleges. Let's have more apprenticeship programs ... labor and business together. But while we grow the economy, let's make it fairer. We need to raise the national minimum wage so that people who work full-time aren't left in poverty. I got to tell you, I was raised to believe in hard work. My grandfather was a factory worker, my dad had a small business, and we really believed you've got to work for what you get in life, right? But if you're working, you shouldn't be at the point where you cannot even afford food or clothes or rent at the end of the year. And isn't it finally time to guarantee equal pay for women's work? You know, this is not just a women's issue. This is a family issue. If you've got a mother, a wife, a sister, or a daughter working, it's your issue. And unlike my opponent, we're going to ask the wealthy, the millionaires and billionaires, to pay their fair share, because we're going to close the loopholes and make sure no multimillionaire ever pays a lower tax rate than a nurse or a teacher or a police officer or a firefighter. And I will not raise taxes on anyone making less than $250,000 a year. So when you go to the polls, vote to grow the economy, more jobs with rising incomes, vote to make the economy fairer. And compare that with what my opponent has proposed. He really believes if you give trillions ... that's trillions with a 't' ... trillions in tax cuts to the wealthy, millionaires, billionaires, big corporations, everything will trickle down. Now, we know that doesn't work; we've seen it. And it's pretty rich coming from a guy who claims to be so rich, who hasn't paid a dime in federal income taxes in 20 years. He says not making taxes makes him smart. Well, I don't know. I don't know how smart you have to be to lose a billion dollars in one year. And besides, what kind of genius loses money running a casino, for heaven's sakes? Actually, it sounds like a few people have been at casinos here. But this means he's contributed zero, okay? He actually has the gall to call our military a disaster. Not only is he wrong, but what right does he have to say that? He hasn't contributed a penny to our military, not a penny to our veterans, not a penny to health care or education, not a penny to highways or infrastructure. This is a false ... false ... charge that he makes about all the problems in our country. And I'll tell you something; we did a little research. He's been denigrating America for decades. This didn't start with his birther lie against President Obama. It didn't even start running against me. Back in 1987, he took out a $100,000 ad in The New York Times criticizing President Reagan. He said our leaders were the laughing stock of the world. So this is a guy who criticizes everybody but himself. And at some point, you got to say, wait a minute, we're better than that. We are stronger than that. We want to forward ... forward ... into the future with confidence and optimism, and that's what we're offering in this campaign. I got to tell you, it is not just what we're against that should motivate you to go to the polls; it's what we are for. And I believe strongly that what we're for will make it possible for all of us, and especially our kids and our grandkids, to have the best future. America's best days can still be ahead of us. But we can't make any of this happen if we don't have you voting. Now, Donald Trump says he can still win, and he's right. That's why it's so important everyone gets out and votes. And here in Florida ... in a lot of places, you can only vote on Election Day, but here in Florida, voting couldn't be easier. Early voting began on Monday. In south Florida, it goes through Sunday, November 6 around the state. You can go to an early voting site between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. In fact, the County Center on East Kennedy Boulevard is just a 10-minute walk from here. You can go vote right after this event. And we'll have staff ready to help you get there. And you can go to iwillvote.com to confirm your polling place and make a plan to vote. But I also hope you will volunteer these last two weeks. We're reaching out to everybody. So go to hillaryclinton.com and sign up to volunteer. Take out your phone and text J-O-I-N, and that is 47246. We can use you. We're making millions of phone calls in Florida. We're knocking on maybe by the time we finish millions of doors. We don't want anybody to be left out or left behind because on January 20th, America will have a new president. I've got to say ... so I've got to say to you that change is inevitable in life. Right? And so the real question is, what kind of change are we going to have? And I want you to talk to anybody you know who is either thinking of not voting or maybe thinking of voting for my opponent. No. I'm serious. I'm serious. After this election, if I'm fortunate enough to be elected, we are going to reach out to everybody. Right? And ask. Ask the people you're talking to what kind of change they really want because I don't think most Americans want the kind of divisive and dark change Donald Trump is offering: mass deportations that will rip families apart, a repeal of gun-free school zones on day one, going back to the day when insurance companies could discriminate against us if we have a preexisting condition, letting Wall Street write its own rules, denying the science of climate change, rolling back marriage equality, defunding Planned Parenthood, the hugest tax breaks ever for the wealthy, and abroad abandoning our alliances and allowing more countries to get nuclear weapons."   And my vision is different. It's more hopeful, optimistic, and unifying. I want us to be a country where every student could afford to go to college if that's what you choose. I want us to be a country where millions of people are working in good, high-paying jobs and in new industries, like clean energy and advanced manufacturing. I want us to be a country where hard-working immigrants, who pay taxes ... and, by the way, one-half of undocumented workers pay federal income taxes, which means they are paying more federal income taxes than Donald Trump paid. And a country where we not only have equal pay for our work but affordable childcare, where we're respected in the world, working with our allies to defeat terrorism and stop the spread of nuclear weapons. So yes, change is coming, The choice is yours about what kind of change we'll have. And I hope you will choose to be part of this campaign because it's not just about winning on November 8th, as important as that is. It is about getting to work because I do believe we are stronger together. Tim Kaine and I wrote a book laying out our agenda because I think you deserve to know what I will try to do as your president. So if you will help, we will come together to give every American the chance to chart your own future and contribute to our great country.  Let's prove once and for all that love trumps hate. Thank you. Secretary Clinton was introduced by Jos.. Andr..s, a famous Spanish-American chef who was awarded the National Humanities Medal in 2016. So I couldn't think of a better place to come back to with another woman whose voice we need now more than ever. I want to say what I think is obvious but can't be said enough, and that is this may be one of the most, if not the most important election of our lifetimes, no matter our age. But for young people it will be so consequential because every election is about the future. And this one is about whether we build on the progress we've made, the legacy that President Obama has built or rip it away and go backwards. So we have a lot of work to do. And I don't mean just in the presidential race. Let's be sure to elect Roy Cooper, the next governor of North Carolina. He will always put the people of North Carolina first. And he will repeal HB2 ... because he knows that discrimination is wrong. It's bad for business, and it's against North Carolina's values. And let's send Deborah Ross to the United States Senate. She will be an independent voice for the working families in this state, and she will help break through the gridlock in Washington. And unlike her opponent, Deborah Ross has never been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump. And remember, it is not just Roy's name and Deborah's name or my name that's going to be on the ballot. So much of what we care about -- so much that's at stake in the election is, too. Voting rights are at stake. And if you care about this sacred right, and want to make sure our leaders of both parties do their part to protect and strengthen it -- not chip away at it, you've got to vote in this election. And so I hope, after all North Carolina has gone through with the efforts to suppress people's votes, you will turn out and say, "No. We demand the right to vote." And supporting our veterans is at stake. If you believe that America should stand with those who served because they served us, then you've got to vote. And so when you think about yourselves, your families, people you know who've worn the uniform of our country, the best way to make clear that we respect the military, and we will do everything we can to make sure they and their families have what they need as they sacrificed for us, is to show up and vote. And climate change is at stake. Now, I shouldn't have to say this in 2016, but I will. If you believe in science, right? And you know that climate change is real and demands action right now ... you've got to show up and vote in this election. Immigration is at stake. If you believe that we need to fix our broken system, keep families together, and give people who love America a path to citizenship ... you've got to vote. And marriage equality is at stake, too. If you believe everyone deserves to be treated equally in America, no matter who they are or who they love ... then you've got to turn out and vote in this election. Good jobs that pay good wages are at stake. Investing in our roads and our bridges and our water systems and all the work that needs to be done in our country. That really matters, and we can put millions of people to work and have a more competitive economy. That's why we've proposed a very big jobs program, because I don't want anybody willing to work in this country not to have a good job with a rising income to support themselves and their families. If you believe that, then you've got to come out and vote. And particularly, for all of the students here, affordable college education is at stake. And not only that, relief from student debt that you already have is at stake. So if you believe as we do that everyone should be able to afford to go to college and graduate and that everyone should be able to pay down and pay off their debt, then you've got to get out and vote in this election. And dignity for women and girls. Again, I wish I didn't have to say this, right? But indeed, dignity and respect for women and girls is also on the ballot in this election. And I want to thank our First Lady for her eloquent, powerful defense of that basic value. So I think you're getting the idea here that I think everything we care about is at stake in this election. So you've got to vote ... and get your friends and families and neighbors to vote too. And don't just take it from me because I think you've heard some really compelling voices say the same thing, and one of them is here with us today, right? There are so many things I admire about our First Lady. Michelle reminds us to work hard, stay true to our values, be good to one another and never, ever stop fighting for what we believe in. She has spent eight years as our First Lady advocating for girls around the world to go to school and have the same opportunities as boys. She has worked for healthier childhoods for our kids here at home, better nutrition, more exercise. And we are seeing the results. We actually are seeing kids who are healthier, something that she was determined to try to achieve. She has encouraged more young people to go to college and follow your dreams, and she has supported America's military families, who serve and sacrifice as well for our country. Now, it hasn't been all hard work. She played a mean round of 'Carpool Karaoke,' and among the many real privileges I've had is to see the President and the First Lady dance. Wow, one could only hope. Now, she also planted an amazing vegetable garden at the White House ... and I can promise you, if I win, I will take good care of it, Michelle. And boy ... thank you! Boy, didn't she dazzle the world with that wise and beautiful speech at the Democratic National Convention this summer? And I have now, I have now stood on the debate stage for four and a half hours with Donald Trump, and if you see any of those debates, well, that has proved once and for all that I have the stamina to be President and Commander in Chief. But there were times during those three debates, the loop running in my head was what Michelle said at the convention, right? 'When they go low, we go high.' And on top of all that, just by being herself every day, never missing an opportunity to honor her parents for the hard work and sacrifice that set her on her way, she has shown every little girl and boy in America that there are no limits to what they can achieve if they work hard and do right and believe in themselves. Seriously ... is there anyone more inspiring than Michelle Obama? And maybe, maybe it's especially meaningful to me because I do know something about being First Lady of the United States, and I'm going to state the obvious. It's not easy. You've got so many people counting on you. You've got the eyes of the world on you. And when you're trying to raise your children as she is and I did, and give them the space and support they need to have as normal and safe and fulfilling childhoods as possible ... that makes it even harder. I used to hang out in the main hall on the second floor of the White House around the time Chelsea would come home from school just to be sure I got to see her and see what happened that day and try to figure out what I needed to be thinking about and doing for her. And let's be real ... as our first African-American First Lady, she's faced pressures I never did. And she's handled them with pure grace. By any standard, she has been an outstanding First Lady who has made us all so proud. And she and the President, she and the President have been such wonderful friends to me and my family. It has just meant the world, the world to me, it really has. I want to say just one thing about the First Lady's work. I mentioned military families. She's been their fierce champion. And military families have come up against a lot in this election. It just made me boil when Donald Trump disrespected a Gold Star family, Mr. and Mrs. Khan. He still hasn't apologized to them. He actually made it worse ... just yesterday, he said again that if America had only made him President years ago, their son, Captain Khan, would still be alive. Honestly, I don't -- I don't understand how anyone would want to rub salt in the wounds of a grieving family. And he keeps insulting our military. Yesterday, when he heard that a retired Army colonel and former dean of the Army War College said that Donald doesn't understand military strategy, Trump said, 'I'll teach him a couple things.' Well actually, Donald, you're the one who's got a lot to learn about the military and everything else that makes America great. Starting by learning about the dignity and sacrifice of our men and women in uniform and their families. And he should learn from Michelle Obama how a leader supports them, not disrespects them! No one knows the stakes in this election better than our First Lady. Because all the progress that we've achieved under President Obama's leadership is at stake ... he pulled our economy out of the biggest ditch that it was in when he became president. He saved the auto industry, he cracked down on Wall Street, he has tackled healthcare, climate change, civil rights, and so much else. And all the work that we've done to strengthen our relationships with other countries and secure our leadership in the world is also at stake. Now, I for one, and I hope all of you, do not want all that hard work ... by our President and our First Lady and by millions of Americans ... to be wiped away. We cannot let that happen. We've got to do everything in our power to get everyone out to vote. To understand no matter what issue you care about, it truly is on the ballot. Now, this has been a hard election at times. It's gotten pretty ugly, hasn't it? We've all felt it ... especially our kids. I hear this from parents and children across our country ... kids write me notes, they hand me little cards and notes when I shake hands with them. Their parents write to me, teachers talk to me. Kids are scared, kids are scared by the rhetoric they're hearing, right? I see the educators' heads nodding. Little girls hear the ugly things that have been said about women in this campaign, and it makes them feel terrible and doubt themselves ... and that is why it is important for voices, like our First Lady's, to stand up and say, 'Wait a minute, respecting women and girls is so important,' and it is especially important for us to send that message to our children, boys and girls alike. Our kids are scared that they're going to be sent out of the country because their parents are immigrants or they're immigrants. They're scared if they're Muslim, or have a disability. I got a letter from a parent -- a mom from Wisconsin, I think, who adopted her son Felix from Ethiopia when he was a toddler. He just turned 11 years old ... he wrote my campaign to let me know he was now 11 years old. I love it when little kids do little birthday remembrances. America is the only country he's ever known. One day, he turned to his mom and asked, 'If Donald Trump becomes President, is he going to make me go back to Ethiopia?' Now that honestly breaks my heart. We've got to make sure all our kids know that America has a place for you -- the American Dream is big enough for you. And then, we've got to make sure they learn the right lessons about how to treat people. I saw that sign, I believe in love and kindness, right? Well, here's one place to start. We know that bullying is a real problem in our classrooms, our playgrounds and online ... and teachers have reported that this election has made it worse. So I want you to know, we're going to launch a major new effort to help states and communities and schools and families end bullying wherever it takes places. And we will work together to make the internet a safer space for kids, invest in front-line professionals like guidance counselors and social workers and school nurses and psychologists to support kids who've been targeted, like the young woman I met in Iowa who told me she was bullied because of her asthma. This has got to stop. And I can't think of anything more important than making sure every single one of our kids knows that they loved just as they are. So ultimately, my friends, as Michelle reminded us this election is about our kids, and in my case, my grandkids. Their lives and their futures -- nothing is more important to me than that. I've been fighting for kids throughout my career. I will fight for them every single day of my presidency. So we have a job to do. Starting right now, let's come together. Let's work together. And let's be hopeful and optimistic and unified in the face of division and hate. Bring people together in a spirit of mutual respect to solve shared challenges. Let's have each other's backs, lift each other up, not tear each other down. Let's go out and win this election to make sure we do exactly that ... for Roy Cooper, Deborah Ross, and all of us. Let's make sure you vote early. Vote as soon as you can, vote this afternoon. I'm excited about what we're going to see happen here in North Carolina, and I am so excited to be introducing our amazing First Lady Michelle Obama! Following Secretary Clinton's remarks, Michelle Obama spoke about the importance of the election and emphasized that every vote matters. "Chairman Price, a renowned physician, has earned a reputation for being a tireless problem solver and the go-to expert on healthcare policy, making him the ideal choice to serve in this capacity," <b>said President-elect Trump</b>. "He is exceptionally qualified to shepherd our commitment to repeal and replace Obamacare and bring affordable and accessible healthcare to every American. I am proud to nominate him as Secretary of Health and Human Services." "It is an honor to be nominated to serve our nation as Secretary of Health and Human Services. Thanks to President-elect Trump and Vice President-elect Pence for their confidence," <b>said Rep. Price</b>. "I am humbled by the incredible challenges that lay ahead and enthusiastic for the opportunity to be a part of solving them on behalf of the American people. There is much work to be done to ensure we have a healthcare system that works for patients, families, and doctors; that leads the world in the cure and prevention of illness; and that is based on sensible rules to protect the well-being of the country while embracing its innovative spirit." Rep. Price was first elected to represent Georgia's 6th district in November 2004. Prior to going to Washington, Price served four terms in the Georgia State Senate ... two as Minority Whip. In 2002, he was a leader in the Republican renaissance in Georgia as the party took control of the State Senate, with Price rising to become the first Republican Senate Majority Leader in the history of Georgia. In Congress, Rep. Price is a proven leader, tireless problem solver and go-to Republican on quality healthcare policy. He serves on the House Committee on Ways and Means. In the 114th Congress, Rep. Price was named Chair of the House Committee on the Budget. In previous Congresses, he has served as Chairman of the House Republican Policy Committee and Chairman of the Republican Study Committee. Committed to advancing positive solutions under principled leadership, Rep. Price has been a fierce opponent of government waste and devoted to limited government and lower spending. For nearly 20 years, Rep. Price worked in private practice as an orthopedic surgeon. Before coming to Washington he returned to Emory University School of Medicine as an Assistant Professor and Medical Director of the Orthopedic Clinic at Grady Memorial Hospital in Atlanta, teaching resident doctors in training. He received his Bachelor and Doctor of Medicine degrees from the University of Michigan and completed his Orthopedic Surgery residency at Emory University. In addition to Chairman Price's nomination, President-elect Trump announced his choice of Seema Verma, one of the leading experts in the country on Medicare and Medicaid, to serve as Administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. "I am pleased to nominate Seema Verma to serve as Administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services," <b>said President-elect Trump</b>. "She has decades of experience advising on Medicare and Medicaid policy and helping states navigate our complicated systems. Together, Chairman Price and Seema Verma are the dream team that will transform our healthcare system for the benefit of all Americans." "I am honored to be nominated by President-elect Trump today," <b>said Ms. Verma</b>. "I look forward to helping him tackle our nation's daunting healthcare problems in a responsible and sustainable way." Seema Verma is the President, CEO and founder of SVC, Inc., a national health policy consulting company. For more than 20 years, Ms. Verma has worked extensively on a variety of policy and strategic projects involving Medicaid, insurance, and public health, working with Governors' offices, State Medicaid agencies, State Health Departments, State Departments of Insurance, as well as the federal government, private companies and foundations.  Ms. Verma has extensive experience redesigning Medicaid programs in several states. Ms. Verma is the architect of the Healthy Indiana Plan (HIP), the nation's first consumer directed Medicaid program under Governor Mitch Daniels of Indiana and then-Governor Pence's HIP 2.0 waiver proposal. Ms. Verma served as the State of Indiana's health reform lead following the passage of Obamacare in 2010. Ms. Verma is a graduate of the Richard G. Lugar Excellence in Public Service Series, and in 2016, Vice President-elect Pence awarded Ms. Verma the Sagamore of the Wabash. Additionally, Ms. Verma was recently selected to participate in the American Enterprise Institute Leadership Network. Prior to consulting, Ms. Verma served as Vice President of Planning for the Health and Hospital Corporation of Marion County and as a Director with the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO) in Washington D.C. Ms. Verma received her Master's degree in Public Health, with a concentration in health policy and management from Johns Hopkins University, and her Bachelor's degree in Life Sciences from the University of Maryland. Because, you know what? That's what I want for America and the young people of America: the joy, the passion, the intensity! And our longtime friend, Jon Bon Jovi, was with us. He was with us up in Philadelphia, where he and Bruce Springsteen sang. And Jon said, 'Well, hey, I want to go down to Raleigh,' and so here he is! And between now and the time the poll closes tomorrow, we are going to be living on a prayer. I was really impressed when everybody's hand went up saying you'd already voted. Well, go find somebody else who hasn't voted, okay? Bring out your friends, your roommates, strangers on the street. Just stop and talk to them about what's at stake in this election. Because North Carolina is key, and it's not only important for our election. Are you ready to elect Roy Cooper as your next governor? Well, I sure hope so. I sure hope so, and I hope you're ready to elect Linda Coleman your lieutenant governor. And how about Dan Blue, III, for state treasurer? And I really, really hope you will send Deborah Ross to Washington! Now, we are all fired up. When we were with the President and Michelle in Philadelphia. You know, the President was talking about how absolutely consequential this election is, and of course it is. I really believe it's the most important election of our lifetimes because we've never had a clearer choice. Never. It is a choice between division or unity; between strong, steady leadership or a loose cannon who could risk everything. It's a choice between an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. And it is a choice that really goes to the heart of who we are as Americans. What I saw before I came in and what I see now is a sense of potential, of joy. There is no reason, my friends, why America's best days are not ahead of us if we reach for them together. We don't have to accept a dark and divisive vision for America. Tomorrow you can vote for a hopeful, inclusive, big-hearted America. Our core values ... our core values are being tested in this election, but my faith in our future has never been stronger. I love our country and I believe in the American people. And I know if we bring everyone together, we can set goals and we can move toward them and we can feel that sense of accomplishment that comes with being part of something bigger than ourselves. You know, one of the great privileges of crisscrossing the country, as I have in this campaign, is meeting remarkable people ... people who stand up against the odds; people who, like my late mother, people who understand that everybody gets knocked down. What matters is whether you get back up, whether you believe you can keep going. Last night, in Manchester, New Hampshire, I had the honor of being introduced by an extraordinary man, Khizr Khan, whose son, Captain Khan, was killed serving our country in Iraq. You may remember Mr. Khan's speech at the Democratic Convention. And again last night, he reminded us of the responsibility we all share to protect and defend our Constitution. The story of Captain Khan is one of courage in the face of danger. He was with his unit when he saw a suspicious vehicle. He told his men to stay back. He moved toward the vehicle to check it out. And the bomb went off. He lost his life, but everyone else in his unit survived. He was awarded the Bronze Star. And this intensely personal tragedy that the Khan family experienced, becoming a Gold Star family, was one that they thought about, grieved over in the privacy of their home, until they heard my opponent start talking about who was acceptable in America and who wasn't. The categories of people, starting with immigrants, including African Americans and Latinos and POWs and Muslims. The list went on and on. And it created in Mr. Khan a sense of despair because he asked himself, would his son have a place in Donald Trump's America? Someone who paid the ultimate price in serving our country. Well, we can answer that question tomorrow resoundingly: Yes. Absolutely. Think about ... think about how generations of Americans throughout our history have come together to meet the tests of their time. Our parents, our grandparents, our great-grandparents defended democracy. They built the great American middle class. They marched for civil rights and voting rights, for workers' rights, and women's rights, for LGBT rights, and the rights of people with disabilities. And tomorrow we face the test of our time. So, remember, it's not just my name or Donald Trump's name on the ballot. It's the kind of country we want. It's every issue anyone cares about. So if you believe America thrives when the middle class thrives, then you have to vote tomorrow. If you believe we should make the biggest investment in new jobs since World War II in infrastructure, advanced manufacturing, clean energy, small business, then you have to vote. If you believe we need more fairness in our economy to raise the minimum wage because no one who works full-time should still be in poverty, then you have to vote. If you believe we need to do more to support working families with affordable childcare, paid leave, and equal pay for women, then you have to vote. And, remember, when my opponent says every time I talk about these issues that I'm playing the woman's card, well, you know what I say. Deal me in. And if you believe, if you believe, all kids deserve good schools with good teachers, no matter what house they live in, you have to vote. And if you believe college should be more affordable, you have to vote. Bernie Sanders and I worked on a plan to make public colleges and universities tuition-free if you earn less than $125,000 and debt-free for everybody else. And for the millions of Americans struggling with student debt, we are going to help you pay that down and pay that off. If you believe in science and that we've got to address climate change, you have to vote. If you believe we need to reform our criminal justice system so everyone is treated fairly, then you have to vote. And if you believe ... if you believe we should never write discrimination into our laws, well, then you know, you know, North Carolina. You've got to vote to get rid of HB2! Now, this is so energizing, we could keep going with a long list. But here's what ... here's what else I want you to know. A good thing this election didn't land during exams, that's all I can say. Look. Tomorrow ... tomorrow night, this election will end. But I want you to understand, our work together will be just beginning. We have to bridge the divides in this country. As the Bible says, we have to repair the breaches. We've got to be willing to start listening to each other again, respecting each other again. And I want to thank Gaga because she has always stood for that fundamental principle of respecting everybody. So I want you to know and I want you to spread the word. I do want to be President for all Americans, not just some, not just the people who support me and vote for me. I want to be President for everyone because we all have a role to play in building that better future for our country and for each of you. So if you haven't voted yesterday, go to iwillvote.com. You can get all the info you need. And you can still sign up to volunteer. Right? Go to hillaryclinton.com or text 'join,' j-o-i-n, to 47246, or stop by one of our offices. We would welcome you to help make sure everybody gets out to vote tomorrow because none of us want to wake up Wednesday morning and wish we had done more. Right? And years from today, when your kids and grandkids ask what you did in 2016 when everything was on the line, you'll be able to say you voted for a stronger, fairer, better America, an America where we build bridges, not walls, and where we prove conclusively that yes, love trumps hate! Thank you! Let's go vote, North Carolina! God bless you! Thank you all very much! Secretary Clinton was introduced by her daughter, Chelsea Clinton, and her husband and former US President, Bill Clinton. Well, my friends, just nine days left until November the 8th. Nine days that really will determine the outcome of the most important election of our lifetimes. And we cannot take anyone or anything for granted. It's great to be here at the Manor Complex, a place that means so much to so many. And there have been ups and downs in all that we've gone through over the years, and even in this campaign, but I want you to know I am focused on one thing: you ... your lives, your futures. The problems that keep you up at night. That's what I'm interested in, and that's what I'm going to be talking about here today and throughout the next nine days. That's really what this election is about. There's a lot of noise and distraction, but it really comes down to what kind of future we want and who, as our president, can help us get there. So I want you to know ... now, I just have to say I know I'm preaching to the choir. But I also, through you, want to talk to people who are still making up their minds, believe it or not, right? Because we've got a choice between a president who will bring us together, keep our country safe, get the economy working for everyone, not just those at the top ... or someone who's temperamentally unfit and totally unqualified for the job. You know, Donald Trump is doing his best to confuse, mislead, and discourage the American people. I mean, he's such a downer, right? And it's time for him to stop fear mongering, stop distracting from what's really at stake, and frankly, stop disgracing our democracy. We can't let him get away with this. But here's the good news. Yes, America is great, and we can make it greater if we work together and we set some goals. But we are seeing Americans coming together ... Democrats, Republicans, independents ... to reject Donald Trump's dark and divisive vision of our country. And it's going to be really important that we make it clear to everyone in these last nine days what's at stake. Because I really believe the vast majority of Americans agree with us. We don't want a president who demeans women. We don't want a president who has plans to break up and deport immigrant families. We don't want a president who perpetrated the lie that President Obama wasn't born in America. We don't want a president who would appoint Supreme Court justices to overturn marriage equality. But I want you to know, the energy we're now seeing out in the campaign is not just about what we're against, it's also about what we're for. Because we also share a common vision. Beyond partisanship and politics, it's a hopeful, inclusive America where everyone counts and everyone has a place, right? And that's exactly what I'm going to be fighting for in these last nine days. We're going to honor people, not insult them. Donald Trump has insulted more than half of our population. African Americans, Latinos, immigrants, Muslims, POWs, women. And by what he has said, so many others who believe that you have a positive future. I agree with that: you do. And I promise you this: I'm going to keep working every single day for you and for the vision of America that we share. Now, I will tell you, my mom taught me to never, ever quit, and what does that mean? Well, that means ..."   You got it. And it also means when you're knocked down, what matters is whether you get up again. I have been fighting for families and underdogs my entire life. I'm not stopping now. We're just getting warmed up, right? And we won't be distracted, no matter what our opponents throw at us. We're not going to be knocked off course. We know how much this election matters, and we know how many people are counting on us. So we're going to take to heart the words of our wonderful First Lady, Michelle Obama: When they go low, we go high. We're going to keep our foot on the gas because Donald Trump's strategy is real simple. They've even said it in his campaign. Here's his strategy about how he's going to win: Get women to stay home. Get young people to stay home. Get people of color to stay home. Get the LGBT committee to say home. It's all part of his scorched earth campaign, and it goes against everything we stand for. So you know how we're going to stop him? By showing up with the biggest turnout in American history. We need everybody to turn out and vote ... women, young people, people of color, the LGBT community, Latinos, African Americans, Americans from all walks of life. Let's break every single record. Let's make that the story of this election. And here's some really good news. This is amazing. More than 20 million people have already voted in this election, most of those votes in the last few days, 3 million of those votes from right here in Florida. Now, you only see numbers like that when people are standing up for what they really believe in. So if all of you vote, if your friends, your family, your coworkers vote, if everyone you talk to between now and Election Day votes, we are going to make some really big history on November the 8th. And I want you not only coming out for me. I want you to reelect our members of Congress. And please elect Patrick Murphy to the Senate. And if there are still people who have doubts about the stakes in the election, listen to this. We've heard some outrageous things in this campaign. I'm sure we'll hear more in the next nine days. But I got to tell you, I was beginning to think that nothing we learned about Donald Trump could surprise me anymore. But yesterday the Washington Post published a report that was truly stunning. It starts with the story of a ribbon-cutting back in 1996 for a nursery school serving children living with HIV and AIDS in New York. Now, let me say, this is important in part to remember. This is a story about children with HIV and AIDS. So there was a big celebration honoring the donors who had supported the nursery school, and all the kids and their families, for whom this was the most important thing you can imagine. Because you know, back in the '90s, some of you remember. Right? Children weren't welcomed in school. And then, unannounced and uninvited, guess who barges in? Donald Trump. He walks right up to the stage. He sat down in the seat that was being saved for a local developer who had made a generous donation. None of the people working for the charity knew why he was there. He wasn't a donor at all. He had never given a single dollar to help build the school. He just wanted people to think he had. So he sat on the stage through the program, even posed for photographs, and when it was over, he got up and walked out. No explanation. No donation. Now really, who does that? What kind of person does that? Really? I mean, who pretends to help kids with HIV and AIDS in order to make themselves look good? Well, I'll tell you: The same kind of person who would pull a bait and switch on a high school chess team. Back in 1997, he was principal for a day at a public school. That was a program we used to have in New York. The chess team was holding a bake sale to raise money to travel to a tournament. They were $5,000 short. He walked up to them and handed them a fake million dollar bill. At first the kids and their parents were excited. Then they were devastated to learn it was a joke. So he gave them 200 bucks and drove away in his limousine. Now, this story does have a happy ending because a woman read the story about Donald Trump's behavior, called the school, and donated the $5,000. And the coach remembers this woman saying, "I am ashamed to be the same species as this man." Now, I got to say, any of you see the debates? Well, you know, I stood next to Donald Trump in three debates for four and a half hours, proving conclusively I have the stamina to do this job. Right? But a lot of what we've heard him say is part of a lifelong pattern. And here's what the Washington Post concludes. 'For as long as he has been rich and famous, he has wanted people to believe he is generous. He spent years constructing an image as a philanthropist by appearing at charity events and by making very public, even nationally televised promises, to give his own money away. It was in large part a fa..ade.' And a months-long investigation by the Washington Post found that Trump had sought credit for charity he had not given or had claimed other people's giving as his own. Now, of course, because he's refused to release his tax returns, we don't even know if he's ever given anything. But here's what we do know. With Donald, it's always Donald Trump first and everyone else last. He abuses his power. He games the system, and he doesn't care who's left holding the bag. And here's what else we know. Donald Trump has a terrible record on LGBT rights. And this election will determine whether we continue the progress we've made or let it be ripped away. We know Trump has promised he'll appoint Supreme Court justices who will overturn marriage equality and that he will repeal President Obama's executive actions to protect LGBT people from discrimination. And just this week, a new story came out that tells us a lot about how he treats LGBT employees. It's a story of a maintenance worker at one of Trump's golf courses. So I want you just to think. This guy works hard. Works with his hands. Probably there 12 hours a day, maybe more, when it's the summer season. After he told his coworkers he was gay, they started harassing him. They called him names. They even threw rocks and golf balls at him. It got so bad he ended up in the hospital. Now, his supervisor saw all of this and did nothing. So finally he went to the police for help. He was too scared even to come back to work. And what did the Trump golf course do? They fired him. Now, this is a heart-wrenching story on a lot of levels. For starters, it's a painful reminder of the harassment, violence, and discrimination too many LGBT Americans still face every single day. And it's deeply distributing that instead of stepping in to stop this unacceptable behavior, Trump's business punished the victim for coming forward. Now, if that's how Donald Trump runs his business, what does it say about how he would run our country? We've made a lot of progress on LGBT rights, but as that story reminds us, we still have work ahead, don't we? There is still no federal law that stops an employer from refusing to hire someone just because he or she is LGBT, or a landlord from refusing to rent an apartment to a transgender tenant, and of course there are still states where you could get married on Saturday, post your Facebook photos on Sunday, and get fired on Monday just because of who you are and who you love. So here's what I'll do as president. We will call on the Congress to pass the Equality Act. And we will then be able to protect LGBT Americans from discrimination in all aspects of our lives. We'll work together to achieve the AIDS-free generation that is within our reach. And we will take on homelessness, bullying, and violence, particularly youth homelessness, which disproportionately hurts LGBT kids. And we are going to end the harmful practice of so-called conversion therapy. LGBT kids don't need to be cured of anything. They just need to be accepted and embraced and respected. And yes, we're going to bring people together to reform our gun laws and keep guns from falling into the wrong hands so that what happened in Orlando can never happen again. Now, some of you know, Chad Griffin and others know, this issue is really important to me. I traveled to 112 countries as your Secretary of State. I saw how countries around the world treated lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people. And I believe with all my heart America has to lead by example. I want ... I want LGBT people in every corner of our country ... because don't forget you all living in Wilton Manors have moved far away from a lot of the places where people are still scared today. Right? And we're going to elevate this issue. We're going to talk about it. We're going to reach out. So when you vote in this election, remember, it's not just my name on the ballot. It's your future. It's who we are as a country. It's every issue we care about. And make no mistake: LGBT rights are at stake. Dignity and respect for every American is at stake. The future of our economy is at stake. I believe when the middle class thrives, Americans thrive. And we're going to make America the clean-energy superpower of the 21st Century, too. And if we're serious about supporting a middle class, we're going to be supporting families. The other day, I was in Pittsburgh. And there was a woman there with her young child. We've got some folks from Pittsburgh. She was shaking Tim Kaine's hand. And she said to him, "I came here hoping I could tell you or Secretary Clinton I had my baby three years ago. And the next day, I was fired. It had been a difficult pregnancy. I called to ask if I could take a little time to recover, and the answer was 'No. Don't come back at all.' Nobody, no parent, should ever have to make that kind of choice, but that's also true when we talk about paid family leave, caring for a spouse or a partner, caring for an elderly relative. I want us to recognize the way we live today. It is no longer the 1950s. We need to support people who are part of committed relationships, of families, of marriages, and give everybody the support you need to actually do what's the most important thing in life. And that is caring for each other. We're going to do everything we can to catch up to the rest of the world: affordable childcare, paid family leave, earned sick days, jobs with rising incomes. We're going to raise the national minimum wage. No one who works full-time should have to raise a family in poverty. And yes, we're going to guarantee equal pay for women's work. We're going to make sure. We're going to make sure that we not only grow the economy but we make it fairer. And I've got to tell you that's such a stark contrast with Trump. He believes if you give the biggest tax cut in American history to the wealthy ... that's with trillions of dollars going to the top ... that will somehow trickle down. It hasn't worked. It won't work. I believe that we could grow the economy from the middle out and the bottom up. And that's exactly what we're going to do. So, my friends, we've got a guy who won't pay his income tax. I mean, I've got to just say when we learned in the debate that he lost a billion dollars and that meant that he didn't pay income tax for like 20 years, he said that was smart. And I thought to myself, how smart do you have to be to lose a billion dollars? I mean, really. And what kind of genius are you to lose a billion dollars while running casinos? But it's serious because it means he's paid zero, zero for our military, our vets, for healthcare, for Pell Grants, for our universities, our colleges, our highways. This is Trump to a T. The stories that I told you about him showing up and acting like he's done something, well, he shows up and criticizes our country. He shows up and discriminates against African Americans when he was denying them the right to rent apartments. He chose to make his products in other countries, not America. He's built a career on stiffing small businesses. I take that personally. My dad was a small business owner. I'm sure glad he never got a contract from Donald Trump. So, my friends, we've got work to do. And let's get to that work. We've got to make sure that we get everybody out to vote. I want you to be able to say on November 9th you voted for a better future, you voted for a better America. And look how easy it is. It is so easy. Wilton Manors City Hall is just a half a mile down the street from where we are right now. And if you are registered in Broward County, you can go to any early-vote location in the county from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. all week. And if you have been mailed your ballot, make sure you fill it out and mail it back today. You can go to iwillvote.com to confirm your polling place. And make sure you have a plan to vote. But, please, also help us in these last nine days. Every phone call you make, every door you knock on will make a difference. So go to hillaryclinton.com. Sign up to volunteer. Take out your phone. Text 'JOIN,' J-O-I-N, to 47246. I don't want anybody waking up on Wednesday morning and seeing the results and getting depressed. I'm against depression. We don't want that to happen in this election. Right?"   We can't let that happen. And I have to ask you if you ... if you know anybody, if you know anybody, who is thinking about voting for Trump, you've got to stage an intervention. Do everything you can to try to convince that person that they surely care about something that Donald Trump is on the wrong side of because I can guarantee you they do because, after all, friends don't let friends vote for Trump. Right? So I am so grateful to all of you. Have many of you have already voted? Okay. So, now, how many of you will help us get somebody else to vote? That's what's going to make the difference. Change is coming. Let's make sure it's the right kind of change. The choice is yours. We're going to do everything we can to build a stronger, better, fairer America, coming together, healing the divides among us. And we're going to prove, once and for all, that love trumps Hate. Thank you. Secretary Clinton was introduced by Ken Evans who is a Broward County Democratic State Committeeman. The Manor Complex, where this event was held, is a gay friendly club/lounge. Thank you, thank you. Wow! It's great to be here at this extraordinary time in our country's history at this great university to have a chance on a beautiful day to lift our sights, to think about what we are capable of doing together. The kind of future that we can create if we search for and find common ground. And it is thrilling to have traveled across our country to see the hopefulness, to talk about the positive changes that are occurring.  To really see America at its best, and tomorrow, each and every one of you gets to make a decision as to whether or not, first, you will vote. Because in Pennsylvania, it's all about Election Day. Other places around the country have been voting for weeks. And what you will vote for.  I'm here to ask you to vote for yourselves, vote for your families, vote for your futures, vote on the issues that matter to you because they are on the ballot, not just my name and my opponent's name. I want to thank Tom Colicchio for coming out here. He's in the middle of opening another one of his great restaurants, but he said he's got these two small kids and he just had to come and be part of lifting up this election and creating the kind of commitment that will bring a record breaking number of Americans to vote. We are on the path to seeing more Americans coming out to vote than we have ever seen in our history.  And I am hoping that you won't just come out to vote, obviously, I hope you vote for me, but I also hope you will send Katie McGinty to the United States Senate. We've got some great elected officials here, and I want to recognize Congressman Mike Doyle, County Executive Rich Fitzgerald, from Pittsburgh, Mayor Bill Peduto, from Braddock, PA, Mayor John Fetterman.  But mostly, I'm here to say thanks. Thanks for taking time out to think about what's -- what the stakes are. I love you all, too. Absolutely! So for those who are still making up your minds or thinking, 'Maybe, maybe it's not worth voting at all,' let me just say: the choice in this election could not be clearer. It really is between division or unity. Between strong and steady leadership or a loose cannon. Between an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top, and an economy that is set up and run for those at the top.  Now, I have spent my public career fighting for kids and families, and standing up for our country, and if you give me the privilege of your vote tomorrow, that is what I will do every single day of my presidency. I will get up in the White House, and I will think about what I can do that day to knock down barriers, to create opportunities, so that you have the chance to fulfill your own dreams. You see, I believe America's best days are still ahead of us. Now, that doesn't mean we don't have to work for it because we do. That doesn't mean that we can just expect it to happens as kind of a birthright, but I really believe that. I would not have worked for 18 months, travelled across our country, thought as hard as I have about what we need to do and how to do it together, proudly stand up and defend the legacy of President Obama, which has given our country progress in the right direction if I did not believe with all my heart that we could do this.  Right? We can do this! We don't have to accept a dark and divisive vision for America. Tomorrow, you can vote for a hopeful, inclusive, big-hearted America. And our core values are being tested in this election. And I know that people are frustrated, a lot of people feel left out and left behind. There's fear, even anger, in our country. But I've got to say: anger is not a plan, my friends. If we're going to harness our energy and try to overcome our problems, then we've got to start talking to each other again, and we have to get good ideas wherever they come from.  Last night in Manchester, New Hampshire, I was with Khizr Khan, whose son was killed while serving in Iraq. You might remember him from the Democratic Convention. He was not a man to be on the stage of a political convention, but when he heard my opponent say what he said about Muslims and he looked at the flag that had been draped on his son's coffin, he felt compelled to speak out. He spoke powerfully about what America means to him and how we have to defend our values and our Constitution.  As he said last night, his son serving in the United States Army with his unit saw something suspicious, moved toward it to check it out telling his men to stay behind, and when the car exploded, he lost his life. He was awarded Bronze Star and the Purple Heart, but as Mr. Khan said, "When you listen to all the people that my opponent has insulted and denigrated, would there be a place in Donald Trump's America for Captain Khan?" The Khan family gives me hope because they truly believe in the values of this great country of ours, and they have stood up holding the Constitution as he did at the convention to say, "People around the world cherish this Constitution, believe in our values. It's a source of hope for billions of people. We will never, ever let that go, and we never let someone rip it away in the kind of negative, divisive, hateful campaign that we have seen from the other side in this election." Sometimes when I hear my opponent speak, I don't recognize the country he's talking about. That doesn't mean we don't have problems and challenges, it doesn't mean that we don't have to do more to help people across our country get better economic opportunities. Of course, we do. But boy, I believe we can do it. I love our country. I believe in the American people. I know what we are capable of. Throughout of history, generations of Americans have risen together to meet the tests of their time. They defended democracy, built the greatest middle class that the world has ever seen, marched for civil rights and voting rights, for workers rights and women's rights, LGBT rights, and rights for people with disabilities.  Tomorrow, we face the test of our time, will we be coming together as a nation or getting further apart? Will we set goals that all of us can help meet? Or will we turn on each other and pit one group of Americans against another?  Now, our names will be on the ballot tomorrow, but those values and every issue you care about will be there, too. What kind of country do we want, and I particularly think about this for young people as I look at this crowd and see so many students and young Americans that deserve the same opportunities that many of us were given. We will make sure they are available because if you think about what it takes to have a thriving America, it comes down to a couple of key issues.  If you believe that America thrives when the middle class thrives, then you have to vote. We're going to make the biggest investment in good-paying jobs since World War II, jobs in infrastructure, small business, clean energy, advanced manufacturing. We're going to actually deliver on that unlike my opponent, who makes his products mostly overseas, buys cheap Chinese steel and aluminum instead of what's made by American steelworkers right here in Pennsylvania. We're going to invest in America, and we're especially going to invest in communities that are left out and left behind. We're going to stand up for the right of workers to organize and bargain. We're going to get incomes rising across America.  And if you believe we need a fairer economy as I do, then we're going to raise the national minimum wage, because no one who works full time in America should still be in poverty. And we're going to do more to support working families with affordable child care, paid leave, and finally, equal pay for women's work.  I've got to tell you, this always get's about the biggest applause ever because fundamentally, we know it's not fair, but it's also about families. If you have a mother, a wife, a sister or a daughter who's working, you don't want her shortchanged, do you? Now, when I talk about equal pay and all of these other family issues, my opponent says I'm playing the woman's card. Well, you know what I say: deal me in.  If you believe all our kids should have good schools and good teachers, no matter what zip code they live in, then you have to vote. If you believe we can make college affordable for every young American, then you have got to vote.  I've got to say, I was very proud of the primary campaign that Bernie Sanders and I ran. It was a campaign on issues and ideas, not insults. And after it was over, he and I got together, and we came up with this plan. Public colleges and universities should be tuition-free for everyone who makes less than $125,000 a year. And it should be debt free for everybody else. I don't think you should go into this massive debt to get your education. It's good for you, it's good for your families, it's good for our country, and we're going to make it affordable for everyone. And for the millions of Americans already struggling with student debt, we're going to ease that burden. We're going to get those interest rates down, we're going to give you a different way of repaying it as a percentage of your income, not tied to a six, eight, 10 percent interest rate, and you're never going to have to pay more than you can afford.  You see, I think there are a lot of positive things to get excited about. And I think the agenda we've put forth in this campaign is one that will really give everybody hope. You see, working for children and families has been the cause of my life, but it's never been more important than it is right now.  So this has to be our mission together ... doing all we can to help every American, especially every young American and especially every child, to have the chance to live up to your God-given potential. Because when it's all said and done, that's what matters the most. Have you helped somebody else? Have you reached out and tried to ease somebody's burden? We do it individually.  My mother got through a neglected, abandoned childhood because people showed her kindness. Her own parents didn't want her. Her own grandparents didn't want her. But that first grade teacher who saw she had nothing to eat, brought extra food every single day to make sure my mother had something to eat. And when she was 14 and had to go out and find a job to support herself and got a job as a maid and a babysitter in somebody's home, she was just relieved that she had somewhere to live and that she could support herself. But the mother of that home understood my mother wanted to go to high school and so she said, 'Dorothy, if you get up early and get your chores done, you can go to high school. You'll have to come right back because I'll need you, but you can do it.' And look, that sounds harsh to our ears, telling a 14 year old, 'Okay, you can go to high school but you have to come right back and you have to work on both sides of it.' But to my mother, it was a blessing. So when I think about what so many people have gone through to give us the opportunities that we had had, and I'm speaking for myself, my mother gave me the resilience, the grit, the get up and go. She told me, 'Everyone gets knocked down. What matters is if you get back up.' And we had a lot of Americans knocked down because of the Great Recession, didn't we? Millions of jobs were lost, millions of homes were lost. Family wealth was wiped out, savings account, 401K's, everything that people had worked so hard for.  Well we've dug ourselves out of the hole and now we need to get up, and we've got to make sure we don't leave anybody behind. I see this man here standing with a sign: 'Coal Miners for Hillary,' and I'll tell you sir, I know how hard times are. And as I have said, and you can take it to the bank, I will not forget you and I will do everything I can to help people who have given so much, worked so hard throughout their lives for generations to build this country. We are not going to forget any American! But I can't do any of this without your help tomorrow.  This election is going to really set the course of our country. There's no doubt in my mind. Tonight, I'll be in Philadelphia with President Obama and Michelle and I so appreciate how hard they worked for me, but it's not for me. It's for us.  When President Obama came into office, put yourself in his shoes -- this young, dynamic, first African-American elected to become President of the United States. And what does he find? He finds the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, that's what he finds.  Wow, those were hard, hard times. I don't think he gets the credit he deserves for making sure we didn't go even deeper in the ditch we were in. But make no mistake: there were reasons we ended up in that ditch. It didn't happen by accident. We had huge tax cuts on the wealthy, the administration in office took their eyes off the financial markets and we know what happened. They ignored the pressures in the mortgage markets and we know what happened.  Elections have consequences for everything we care about. And that's why we've got to each and every one of you put down your stake in our future. If the lines are long tomorrow, please wait. In early voting, we have had people waiting in line for two and three hours and there have been reporters and others going up and down the line, asking them, all types of Americans, not one type -- all types, 'Why are you here?' 'Because my future depends on it,' they say.  So tomorrow is the election, but that is just beginning. We have to heal this country. We have to bring people together, listen and respect each other. Now I know it's unusual for somebody running for president to say this, I started saying this months ago, because I was literally meeting who were scared about what they were hearing in this election. I've known a lot of the Republicans who've run for president been elected president in recent history, I didn't agree with them on everything, obviously we had our differences, but I didn't doubt that they were fit to serve as president. This election is different. This person is temperamentally unqualified, experientially unqualified to be president and so many people know that.  So I think we do need more love and kindness, right? We have to got to rise above all of this hate filled rhetoric, all of these insults and scapegoating and finger pointing and insulting. I want to be a president for all Americans. Not just some. I want to be the president for Democrats, Republicans and Independents. I want to be the president for those who vote for and those who vote against me. I want to represent everybody. Because I know we have a role to play in building a better future.  So it starts tomorrow. If you don't know where to vote, go to IWillVote.com. You can get all the information you need, the polls will be open from 7 AM to 8 PM. We are on track, as I said, to have a huge turnout. But we can only do that if all of you make up your minds, you bring all your friends, everybody you know, to make sure your voices are heard.  This is a historic, historic election and we're going to do everything we can, not only to win, but then immediately to get to work. And I especially invite anyone who wants to volunteer for the next 24 hours, go to hillaryclinton.com, text join, J-O-I-N to 4-7-2-4-6, stop by one of our offices. We would love to see you. Because when your kids and grandkids ask what you in the future what you did in 2016, when everything was on the line, you'll be able to say: you voted for a stronger, fairer, better America where we build bridges, not walls. And where we finally prove once and for all that, yes, love trumps hate. Thank you. And thank you. I am so honored to be introduced by Mae Wiggins and someone who made such a contribution throughout her life as a nurse to so many people and who, as you can tell, just feels still the pain of being rejected on the basis of her race. It took a lot of courage to come here, Mae. Thank you. Thank you for being with us. I also want to thank a long-time friend of mine, a great activist, extraordinary advocate in Congress, and that's U.S. Representative Eleanor Holmes Norton. I want to thank Mayor Allen Thomas for welcoming me here. And either you're all related to him or you think he's doing a good job. Well, I told him I want to be a good partner with mayors like him. And work to help communities like Greenville that are growing and striving and attracting young people. He told me that the average age in the residents here in Greenville was 26 years old. I also want to acknowledge Josh Stein, candidate for North Carolina attorney general. Patsy Keever, chair of the North Carolina Democratic Party. And State Senator Don Davis. And I saved the best for last, someone who I've gotten to know over the years; someone who I really look forward to working with. First thing that Congressman Butterfield said to me is "I have to talk to you about our farmers." Very first thing he said. Proceeded to tell me that he was out on a 200-acre sweet potato farm earlier today. We talked about the damage that Hurricane Matthew has done; the lives lost; the homes lost; and also the agricultural damage with all the flooding. And my heart goes out to everyone who has been affected. We've got to be really focused on what we're going to do with this extreme weather. We're getting more of it in more places. And I'm going to make that a priority for my presidency to make sure communities are well prepared. They're resilient. But that we also work to try to limit the damage by taking on the challenge of climate change and changing weather patterns. And nobody knows more about weather than our farmers. And I am very committed to supporting farms of all sizes, but particularly small farms. You know, I think you said the farm you went to this morning, G.K., was 200 acres. You know, that's a lot of land, but that's not a gigantic multi-thousand-acre farm. And sometimes I think that we spend too much time and money looking after the big, giant farms, and not enough taking care of the smaller farms, the family-owned farms, farms that have been in people's families for generations. And I will do my very best working with G.K. and Eleanor and others in Congress to focus federal attention and resources on places that need it. And eastern North Carolina is a place that needs it. There are still too many people who feel like they have been left out and left behind. And so we've got to spend time thinking about how we bring everybody along. That is my goal as your president. I want to knock down the barriers that stand in the way of people and places getting ahead. Now also, on a personal note, I was in Arizona last night and had a great rally there. I don't know -- 15,000, 16,000 people. It was just extraordinary. But I was a little anxious during my speech because the Cubs were playing in the World Series. And, you know, I've been a fan all my life; started watching baseball with my dad; went to Wrigley Field. And, you know, it's been a long time, 108 years, to win a championship and make history. And I only wish that my late father and the great Ernie Banks, Mr. Cub, could have seen it happen. So last night was very special on lots of fronts. And who knows? Maybe we'll see even more history made in a few days. You know, the last time the Cubs won, women couldn't vote. And I think women are making up for that in this election. So thank you. Thank you so much for being here. Are you ready to vote? How many -- how many folks have already voted? [ Well, that's really impressive. Are you ready to volunteer these last few days? Are you ready to elect Ray Cooper your governor? Have a governor who puts families first and your needs. I know he'll do a terrific job.  Are you ready to elect Deborah Ross to the United States Senate? She will be the independent voice that North Carolina families deserve. And unlike her opponent, she's never been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump. And then, are you ready to elect our next president and commander in chief? You know, did any of you -- any of you see those debates? Well, you know, I spent four-and-a-half hours standing next to Donald Trump, proving conclusively I have the stamina to be the next president and commander in chief. But, you know, he kept saying things like, "Well, you know, what have you done for 30 years?" Well, we know what he's done for 30 years, starting with discriminating against African Americans and denying them housing back in the 1970s. I chose a different path. I have spent my career fighting for kids and families. And I helped to create the Children's Health Insurance Program as first lady. That now provides healthcare to 8 million children a year. And I have to tell you, I know it doesn't make headlines. It's not going to, you know, get a big Twitter war going, but when I travel around and shake hands like I'll do after my remarks, and somebody says to me, "The Children's Health Insurance Program saved my son's life." I met a woman here in North Carolina whose daughter was born deaf. And the doctor said, "You know, she's never, ever going to be able to talk; she's not ever going to be able to hear." Her mother, who is determined, began doing investigations; she found out that there were some possible treatments. But they were expensive. She didn't know what she was going to do. And she took her daughter to the doctor and the doctor said "I just heard about this new program, the children's health insurance program. Maybe you can qualify for that." Because it's really for families that aren't poor, but don't have much money, and a lot of families isn't it. And families that don't have an employer that provides health insurance, self employed, independent contractors. So, the mom found out about this thing call the children's health program and low and behold they did qualify and they started the treatments for their daughter. I met that young woman, and she said hello to me and she talked to me. She just graduated from college, right here in North Carolina. So don't let anybody tell you, it doesn't matter what you stand for, what you fight for, and who you are trying to help. When you make your decision about who to vote for in this election. As a Senator from New York I worked to rebuild New York City after the 9/11 attacks and to provide healthcare to the brave first responders who ran toward danger not away from it. And many of them... inaudible</i>]  God bless you. That's another thing, I meet people all over who were there, and who worked there and I meet people who got sick because they worked there. And as your Secretary of State, I traveled to 112 countries negotiated cease fires, reduced the threat of nuclear weapons, stood up for human rights and women's right and LGBT rights around the world. And everything I've done, it's because I've been listening to people and again I know that's not very exciting. I plead to that. You spend time listening not talking, you know, what are the poor journalists going to say, "Uh, there Hillary Clinton was listening again," right? But I'll tell you it is what motivates me to hear people's stories, to hear the tribulations and triumphs. You get good ideas. Bring people together; find common ground, even with people we disagree with. I disagree with people on lots of issues, but I believe the only way we can get things done is to actually listen and respect each other, and try to find common that common ground. And that will enable us to get results for people. And if you elect me next Tuesday that is the kind of President I'll be. And from the first day of this campaign, I've been telling you what I want to do. Putting forth my ideas about what I think will help you. I truly believe that you deserve a candidate that you can vote for, not just someone to vote against. And so if we are gonna make this choice we have got to be clear. The positives and the negatives, because one way or the other, come this January, America is going to have a new President. And it will be either me or Donald Trump. And you know what else? People say all the time, you know I want change, will come, that is certain. The question is what kind of change are we going to have. Are we going to work together to build a stronger fairer better America, or are we going to fear the future and fear each other and hunker down and be paralyzed by all of our prejudices, our discrimination that stops us from coming together? So, here is what I want you to do in these next days as you talk with people who maybe haven't yet voted, maybe haven't yet made up their mind. I want you to ask them, imagine it is January 20th, 2017 and it is Donald Trump standing in front of the capital taking the Oath of Office. Imagine what that will be like to have him in the Oval Office, making the decisions that effect your lives and your futures. Imagine having a president who demeans women, mocks the disabled, insults African Americans and Latinos. Who pits people against each other instead of pulling them together. Someone who always puts himself first and doesn't care who gets hurt along the way A president with a very thin skin, who lashes out at anyone who challenges him. Who praises adversaries like Vladimir Putin and picks fights with our allies and even attacked the Pope. The truth is we don't have to imagine what that would be like, because everything that Donald Trump has said and done, both in his career and in his campaign, is a preview of what could happen. You know as Michelle Obama says, the presidency doesn't change who you are, it reveals who you are. And we have all see all we need of Donald Trump. If Donald Trump were to win this election, we would have a commander and chief who is completely out of his depth and whose ideas are incredibly dangerous. Someone who wants more countries to have nuclear weapons, and who could easily insult a foreign leader and start a real war instead of just a twitter war. And yet this morning in Florida, Donald stood on a stage and said and I quote "I am honored to have the greatest temperament that anyone has ever had". Now -- he knows we can see and hear him, right? This is someone who at another rally, yesterday, actually said out loud to himself, stay on point Donald, Stay on point. His campaign probably put that in the teleprompters, stay on point Donald, stay on point. You know, we have seen it over and over again. We know his true self. His instinct is to say whatever pops into his head, no matter how wrong he is. He can't help himself. So is this someone we want to put in charge of our military? Is this someone that we want to treat people the way he has demonstrated, his disrespect throughout this campaign. In a country that values, religious liberty and freedom. Someone who would ban every Muslim in the world from ever coming to our country. Someone who thinks the lives of black people are all crime and poverty and despair. He has no idea, none, about the strength of the black church, the vibrancy of black owned businesses, the excellence of historically black colleges and universities, the rise of a new generation of black activists for social justice and the success of black leaders in every field. Remember how he denied housing to Mae Brown Wiggins. And Mae wasn't alone. Whenever African Americans tried to rent an apartment, their application was marked with a "C" -- "C" for colored. In fact, Donald, his father Fred and their entire company were sued by the Justice Department for discriminating against African Americans and Latinos in the 1970s. They settled the case, but the Justice Department was forced to go after them again because they continued to discriminate against people of color. Think about that. If he were to win, he would be in charge of the federal housing department. If he doesn't respect all Americans, how can we trust him to serve all Americans? And then another recent example is the way Donald Trump treated what are called the "Central Park Five." These were five black and Latino kids, some as young as 14. Who, it turns out, were wrongly convicted of a terrible crime in New York back in 1990. Donald Trump took out full-page ads in four newspapers calling for the death penalty for these kids. Nearly three decades later, they were exonerated by DNA evidence. Also, someone else confessed to the crime. So they were finally released from prison and justice was done, but not only did Donald Trump refuse to apologize for calling for their execution, he actually said they should still be in prison. To him, those kids will still and always be guilty no matter what the evidence says. Do we want this man appointing judges? Do we want him controlling the Justice Department?   He has spent this entire campaign offering a dog whistle to his most hateful supporters. He retweets white supremacists and spreads racially tinged conspiracy theories. And you better believe he's being heard loudly and clearly. Just a few days ago, and I want you to hear this because this has never happened to a major -- to a nominee of a major party. Just a few days ago, Donald Trump was endorsed by the official newspaper of the Ku Klux Klan. They wrote their endorsement under the slogan of his campaign, "Make America Great Again." They said it's about preserving white identity. And they placed their faith and hope in him. You've got to ask yourself: Do any of us -- any of us who believe in our Constitution, who believe in the rule of law, who believe that we are stronger together, who believe that we want to keep moving positively toward the vision of freedom and equality set forth by our founders -- do any of us have a place in Trump's America? It's not just about communities of color. It's about young people. It's about any of us who don't ever want us to go back to a time when you could officially discriminate; where people could be intimidated. That is not who America is and we're not going to let it ever go back to that. But it doesn't end there. You've also got to ask: Do women and girls have a place either? Imagine our daughters, or in my case now my granddaughter, growing up with someone who ranks women by their looks; gives them numbers and brags about doing things to them without their consent. Just imagine what that would mean to young women's confidence and self-worth. And how that will affect our young men and boys, who we want to teach and nurture also to respect each other and respect girls and women as well. So, this is a pretty clear choice, North Carolina. I've said many times in this campaign that Donald Trump has showed us who he is. Now we have to decide who we are. Right? And across America, people are doing just that -- rejecting Trump's dark and divisive vision for one that is much more hopeful, inclusive and unifying. We know that America is big-hearted, not small-minded. We want to lift people up, not tear people down. We are called -- we are called. In fact, we are commanded, those of us who are Christians, to love our neighbor as ourselves, aren't we? We are not asked, we are not requested, we are not urged -- we are commanded. And we know how hard that is. When I used to teach Sunday School, I often taught on that, not because it was well known, but because I think it's so hard and challenging. Love your neighbor as yourself? Well, first, you've got to love yourself. You've got to respect yourself. And then you have to love your neighbor as yourself. I believe with all my heart that we are better than this. And that's why I want to paint a different picture. Because here's what we're going to do if we win this election. We're going to take on systemic racism with a full commitment and real follow through. We are not going to accept the status quo. What happened to that church in Mississippi yesterday should not be normal. People painted "vote Trump" on the side. And then they set it on fire. Who would do that to a house of worship? In America, that can never be acceptable. What happened in Flint, Michigan should not be normal or acceptable -- little babies, toddlers, children drinking water that was poisoning them. And there are too many young African Americans who are dying either in police incidents or from random gun violence. You know their names: Trayvon Martin, Eric Garner, Sander Bland, Key Scott. So many. We can't accept that as normal either. So we are going to get to work. I'm just telling you. If I'm fortunate enough to be your president, we're going to roll up our sleeves and get to work, because that's when we're at our best, solving our problems. We're going to dismantle the so-called school-to-prison pipeline and replace it with a cradle-to-career pipeline for every child in this country. I want to make sure that our kids have the chance to thrive with good schools and good teachers no matter what ZIP code they live in. We will reform our criminal justice system from end to end. It is wrong. And I don't care whether you are black or white. It is wrong that black men are far more likely to be stopped by police, charged and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men for the same crimes. It's wrong, and we're going to do something about that. And Donald Trump, whenever he's face with these issues says "well the answer to our problems is more law and order." He doesn't tell you what he means by that, but it's kind of code for fear and division. What I think we need to do, is to work together to restore trust between our police and our communities. I think we are all safer when everyone has respect for the law, and everyone is respected by the law. And it's not all, we are going to take common sense steps to reduce gun violence and save lives, because right now, we've got too many people who should not have excess to weapons: the mentally ill, felons, domestic abusers, terrorists. You know, we can't just bow down and say theres nothing we can do, commensurate with the second amendment. Donald's always trying to say "oh, you know, she's going to repeal the second amendment." What nonsense. Absolute nonsense. But I believe we can respect and honor the second amendment, and keep people safer by keeping guns out of the wrong hands. And we're going to make significant investments in communities that have been let down and left behind. Congressman Butterfield and I were talking about this. There's some good ideas in the Congress to focus on communities, white, black, Latino, Native American, wherever they might be that have been left out. We need to get the engine of economic growth going, because we believe that we should have an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. We believe that we should raise the national minimum wage, because anyone who works full time in poverty should not be mired and left behind. And I think not only do Americans deserve a raise, which Donald doesn't agree with and wanted to eliminate the national minimum wage, I think it's finally time for women to get equal pay for the work we do. I don't know about you, but this is not just a women's issue. I'm always accused by Donald and his supporters, that whenever I talk like that, I'm playing the woman's card. Well, I've always said, if that's playing the woman's card, deal me in, you got that right. But I actually think I'm playing the family economics card, because if you have a mother, a wife, a sister or a daughter, she deserves to be paid fairly for what she does in the work force. And we're going to have a big investments in new jobs, infrastructure jobs, our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports, our airports, our water systems. And we're going to do more to bring advanced manufacturing to inner cities and rural communities. Put people to work, doing work that has a really productive purpose. We're going to invest in more clean, renewable energy jobs, these are jobs that cannot be exported, they have to be done right here in eastern North Carolina. Now it's fair to say "Ok, that sounds good, how are you going to do all that?" Ok, I'll tell you two things. First, I have said, and you can hold me to it, I will not - will not raise taxes on anyone making less than $250,00 a year. You see, I come from the middle class. My dad never made anything near that, even in those dollars back in those days. But I know that the best way to grow our economy is from the middle out and the bottom up. Not the top down, that does not work for most Americans. And so, secondly, I'm going where the money is. The money has gone to the wealthiest of Americans and big corporations in the last 15 years. And if you ask Donald Trump what is his economic policy? It is to give trillions - trillions of dollars in tax cuts to himself, to his family, to the wealthy, to corporations. I just think that's a bad, bad idea. We're going to make the wealthy pay their fair share, and we're going to make sure Wall Street never threatens Main Street again. And we're going to make public colleges like East Carolina University tuition-free. Tuition-free for working and middle class families, and debt free for everybody else. And if you're struggling with student debt, we have a plan to ease that burden and cut your bills, and get you out from under debt. And we're going to create $25 billion fund specifically aimed at supporting historically black colleges and universities. But I don't think that every young person needs to go college. If you want to, I'm going to make it affordable for you, but if you also want some other way of making a good living, let's bring technical education back into high schools and connect them up with community colleges and business apprenticeships.  There is such a stark difference on every issue that matters between me and my opponent, and I'm asking folks who are still making up their minds to really search your heart about what kind of country we are, and what kind of future we want. I just don't believe we're at our best when we stoke fear about each other. Now, that does not mean we have to agree about everything, of course not. But it does mean we have to be willing to listen and to come together to solve problems that affect us individually and as a society. I don't think I have all the answers, I don't think anybody does. When Donald Trump at his conventions said he alone could fix everything in America, I thought about our founders meeting in Philadelphia. It wasn't one person creating our country, it was many people working together. Think about every social movement, every economic advance, every university like this one, every achievement that you've made in your own life, somebody helped you. You worked with somebody. Look at this community. Everybody working together, making Greenville really grow and thrive, making this university better and better every single year. That is my experience of America, so here's what I hope you will do. I hope you will get everybody you know, and yourselves , if you haven't voted yet, to vote early. Because the other's strategy is to scare people and intimidate people from going to the polls. Now, Donald Trump's campaign knows that if women turn out, if people of color turn out, if young people turn out, if people who share our vision of a positive unified country, turnout, there's no way he can win, because that is more than half the people in America. You may have noticed that President Obama was in Chapel Hill yesterday. He's coming back to North Carolina tomorrow, because he know how hard it is to get anything done in Washington. As he said yesterday, everything we've done is dependent on him being to pass the baton to somebody who believes in the same things he does. Well I'll tell you what, I'm ready to grab that baton. He's going to have to bend down for me to be able to reach it, because you know he's a tall man. But I've been practicing. I spent four years working with him. I call him my partner and my friend, and I am ready to defend and build on his progress, coming out of his eight years of the presidency. So let's get out and vote, and let's vote for the kind of future that we want, the kind of country that we want. Find your early voting location for the next three days, please, go take people there. We will show once and for all, love trumps hate, thank you all. You know, there's something special about this place. And some of you may have recognized the song that was playing when I came in, an amazing anthem sung by the talented Andra Day called 'Rise Up.' And that is what Detroit is doing ... you are rising up! And that is exactly what we're going to do in America. We are going to rise up and make sure the American dream is big enough for everyone. I'm looking forward to working with the great team you have here in Detroit and in Michigan. I want to thank your senators, Senator Debbie Stabenow and Senator Gary Peters. I want to thank your members of Congress, Congressman John Conyers, Sandy Levin, Congresswomen Brenda Lawrence and Debbie Dingell. I want to thank your great mayor, Mayor Mike Duggan, and thank you. Wayne County Executive Warren Evans. Sheriff Benny Napoleon. The president of the UAW, Dennis Williams. Longtime friends and former colleagues of mine, former Senator Carl Levin and his wife Barbara are here. And to all who are present today. And I was delighted that my friend and my supporter, Mark Cuban, could be here because ... he's not only a real billionaire ... he's actually shared his profits with his employees. Now, are you ready to vote on Tuesday? Are you ready to volunteer to get everybody out to vote? Are you ready to choose our next president and commander-in-chief? Did any of you see the three debates that we had? Well, I spent four and a half hours standing next to Donald Trump, proving once and for all I have the stamina to be the next president. Now, he kept saying a lot of unusual things, didn't he? And, you know, there's a certain preparation you do to be ready for those debates, and of course I did it because I think you should prepare to be president of the United States. And I did practice my composure. People said to me, well, how did you do that? The things he was saying. And then in that second debate when he was following you around and lurching over you. I said, well, I did practice. And I had my friends and my family just spend hours saying terrible things to me. So I was ready. But he would say, like, 'Well, what have you done for 30 years?' And you know, I don't want to brag. But I do think it matters what you've done, and especially what you've done that maybe improves somebody else's life, right? And one of the great joys of this campaign has been traveling around our country meeting people who have been affected by what we've been doing. For example, as First Lady, I helped create the Children's Health Insurance Program, which covers eight million kids. And these are families that they're not poor families, they're working people, but they don't make enough money and they don't work for somebody who provides insurance, and so very often their kids were being affected by not getting the health care they should have had. I met a woman whose baby daughter when she was born was diagnosed as totally deaf, and the doctor said, 'We're sorry, there's really nothing we can do for her.' But this mother, like many mothers I know, did not take that for an answer, right? She got on the internet. She began to research and she found that there were treatments that she could maybe provide to her little daughter, but they were expensive and she and her husband didn't have that kind of money and they didn't have insurance. She was at her doctor's office and just so distraught, and the doctor said, 'Well, there's this new thing called the Children's Health Insurance Program. Maybe you should look into it.' Turned out she was eligible. She signed up. She started giving her daughter the best health care that every child in this country should be able to have, by the way. And when I was in North Carolina, I heard about her and I got to meet her, but more than that, I met her daughter, who talked to me and who just graduated from college ... because she got the health care and she got the treatment that she deserved to have. I'll tell you what, that is how I judge my last 30 years. Have I done something to help somebody else? I am well aware of the blessings that I have had, and I want to be sure that all of us figure out a way to pay it forward, make it possible for more families, more kids to have the chance to live up to their own God-given potential. And I was a Senator in New York on 9/11, so I know what can happen ... the evil and the hatred of terrorism. I saw it. And I spent my time helping to rebuild New York City and helping to get health care for the brave first responders who ran toward danger, not away from it ... our police, our firefighters, our EMTs. And I'll tell you who else we got covered. We got construction workers who ran with their supplies and their tools, and I see one right out there who knows exactly what I'm talking about. All across the city, people were leaving their job sites and rushing toward danger. That was America at its best. And don't ever forget what we are capable of being, who we are. We are not afraid. We are brave, courageous people who will do our best if given the chance. As your Secretary of State, I went to 112 countries, negotiated ceasefires, reduced the threat of nuclear weapons, stood up for human rights and women's rights and worker rights and LGBT rights. I'm telling you this because I want you to know that I will do everything I can. If I am honored to be your president, I will get up every day in that White House, and I will go to work for you and your families to make it possible for you to get the chances and the opportunities you deserve to have. I want you to have a candidate you can vote for and not just someone to vote against. That's why Tim Kaine and I have run a campaign based on ideas and issues, not insults because if you really take a look at what is at stake in this election, it is a choice between two very different visions for America. I've got to say when I hear my opponent talk about America, I don't recognize the country he's talking about. It is so dark, so divisive, so hateful. That is not the America that I believe in. I believe that we should have a confident, optimistic, inclusive vision of where we're going and how we're going to get there. I love our country, and I believe in the American people. And I think there's nothing we can't achieve if we work together and we set some goals and we go after them. You see, we believe in an America that is bighearted, not small-minded. We believe in an America that is already great but can be greater if we do our part. And we believe America is great because America is good. Never forget that. If we lift each other up and not tear each other down, we can go even further. And I believe with all my heart. That's why the slogan of my campaign sums it up, that we are stronger together. And so come next January 20th, America is going to have a new president. I know ... I know that ... I know that a lot of people say that they want change. Well, let me tell you this. Change is inevitable. There will be change. The question is, what kind of change are we going to have?  Are we going to build a stronger, fairer, better country or are we going to fear the future and each other? I sure hope not. That is not the America that I believe we are. And so here is what I want to ask you to do. I want you to talk to your friends and your family and your neighbors. Michigan is one of these states that doesn't have early voting. I've been all over the country going to states that are already voting. In fact, I don't know. About 31 to 32-3 million people have already voted in those states. But Michigan votes on Tuesday. And I imagine ... I imagine there are ... some of you know people who say they're going to vote for Donald Trump. Right? I know. I know. I understand that. I mean, I would hope you would try to stage an intervention before it's too late. But maybe you could ask them with you to imagine, imagine January 20th, 2017. And imagine that my opponent is taking the oath of office in front of the Capitol. Imagine having a president who demeans women and mocks the disabled, who insults African Americans and Latinos and Muslims, who personally engages in busting unions and preventing people from having the right to bargain collectively. Now, the truth is we really don't have to imagine what that would be like because everything he has said and done, both in his career and in this campaign, tells you what could happen. Now, Michelle Obama, who says so many wise and wonderful things, she said the presidency doesn't change who you are; it reveals who you are. And I think we've seen who Donald Trump is. Maya Angelou, another great American, Maya Angelou said, when someone shows you who he is, believe him the first time. And if my opponent were to win, we would have a president who has only ever been in it for himself. Just last year, he said again it wouldn't have mattered if we had rescued the auto industry or let it go bankrupt. What is he talking about? I'm proud that President Obama saved the auto industry. And I'm even prouder that because of the hard work of people in Detroit and across Michigan and the Midwest, the U.S. auto industry just had its best year ever. If Donald wins the election, we'd have a president who wants to ban every Muslim in the world from coming to visit the United States. We are a country founded on religious freedom. That runs contrary to our Constitution. We would have a president who has said repeatedly that he thinks the lives of black people are all about crime and poverty and despair. He has no idea about the strength of the black church and the vibrancy of black-owned businesses and the excellence of historically black colleges and universities. He seems to know nothing about the rise of a new generation of black activists and the success of black leaders in every field. I think he needs a visit from Reverend Wendell Anthony, don't you? Yesterday in North Carolina I was honored to stand with a woman named Mae Brown Wiggins. Decades ago, she was a hard-working nurse in New York City. She was looking for an apartment that she could afford to rent. But Donald Trump and his father, Fred, turned her away. You see, whenever African Americans tried to rent Trump apartments, their application was marked with a 'C,' C for colored. And that didn't sit very well with Mae, so she went to the authorities, and eventually the Department of Justice sued the to us for housing discrimination. And although they settled, they wouldn't change. So the government had to take them back to court. That's a pattern. This is what happens time and time again with my opponent. If he were to win, he would be in charge of the Federal Housing Department. If he doesn't respect all Americans now, how can we trust him to serve all Americans in the future? He has such a casual disregard of our Constitution. He doesn't seem to understand the rule of law, that we really are a nation of laws, not men. Here's the latest example. There was a terrible crime back in 1990 in New York City. It was called the Central Park Five. Maybe some of you have heard of it. There were five black and Latino kids, some as young as 14. They were wrongfully convinced, and they were in prison where they spent years. Donald Trump took out full-page ads calling for the death penalty for the kids. And even after they were exonerated by DNA evidence and someone else confessed to that terrible crime, Trump actually said they should still be in prison. It doesn't matter if you're innocent. If he decides that you should be in prison or you should be locked up. No wonder he admired Vladimir Putin, because that's exactly what Putin does to his people. So we can't trust him with our Constitution. We can't trust him to obey the rule of law. He has shown us who he is. Now we have to decide who we are. So let me paint you a different picture. Here is what we're going to do together if we win this election on Tuesday night. We have three big challenges. Number one, we got to get the economy working for everyone, not just those at the top. Number two, we've got to keep our country safe, and we have to work with our allies to lead the world with strength and intelligence toward peace and prosperity. Number three, we've got to bring our country together. We have got to overcome these divides. We have to heal our nation. And I hope that you will help me meet all three of those challenges. I have said repeatedly that we're going to take on discrimination and bigotry because any time we hold somebody back, it can lead to holding other people back. We can't accept as normal what we're seeing across our country because of his campaign. A church in Mississippi was burned this week. Someone painted 'Vote Trump' on the side and then set it on fire. We can't let ... we can't let that happen. What happened in Flint, Michigan should not be normal or acceptable. Our kids should be guaranteed clean air and clean water. Those are basics. We've got to do everything we can to make sure that we take care of our children. And it's important for us to recognize that when I talk about getting the economy to work for everybody, that means I want the biggest jobs program since World War II ... infrastructure, advanced manufacturing, clean, renewable energy technology. Some people say we can't do that. Well, I'm telling you, they're wrong. They're wrong. We have the best workers, the most productive workers. We're going to give them more to work on, more products to produce. And we're going to do more for small business because small business is the backbone of so many communities. And I want everybody to have the chance to succeed in America. That means we're going to dismantle the so-called school-to-prison pipeline and replace it with the cradle-to-college pipeline. And we're going to make sure that every child has a chance to go to a good school with good teachers, no matter what zip code that child lives in. And I want to start with our youngest kids, with pre-kindergarten programs. And then I want to be a good partner with our teachers. We've got to have high expectation and get results in helping our children. And I want to be sure that we put technical education back into high school because there are good jobs out there waiting for young people with the skills to do them. It'll be important that we create an environment in which our police and our communities can work together and trust each other. I believe we are safer when everyone has respect for the law and everyone is respected by the law. And that's what we're going to work for. We're also going to take common-sense steps to reduce gun violence and save lives. This has nothing to do with the scare tactics coming from my opponent. Have you seen he's starting to wear a camo hat now? Really. We are going to work with responsible gun owners who understand that we've got to keep guns out of the hands of people who shouldn't have them in the first place. And while we create more safe communities, we want to invest in those communities. I want to continue the good work that our past two Democratic Presidents have done, one named Clinton, one named Obama. And I want to be a really strong partner. I'll compete a little with them. I want to be a really strong partner with Detroit and other cities that are on the way back up to make sure you get the investment and the support, the housing, and the jobs that you need. But we also have to make sure our economy is fairer. That's why I believe we should raise the national minimum wage, because people who work full time should not be left in poverty. And isn't it finally time to guarantee equal pay for women? This is not a women's issue. If you have a wife, a mother, a daughter, or a sister who works, it's your issue. It's a family issue. And every time I talk about wanting to have affordable childcare, paid family leave, equal pay for women, the other side accuses me of playing the women's card. I'll tell you what, if standing up for equal pay is playing the women's card, then deal me in. And one of the other big challenges we're going to take on ... I am so excited about this. I am really proud of the campaign that Bernie Sanders and I ran because it was a campaign about issues. And what we decided after it was over is how we could work together to make sure that everybody who wants to go to college can afford not just to start but actually to graduate. So we came up with a plan that if you go to a public college or university, you will go tuition-free if your family makes less than $125,000 a year. And it will be debt-free for everybody above that so you don't go into debt. And for people who already have student debt, we're going to help you pay it down and pay it off to get out from under it. And I want especially to support historically black colleges and universities that have done so much to bring forth a leadership cadre in our country. Now, this is just some of what we are offering in this campaign, because we really believe you need to look at what will happen after the election. I had a friend say to me the other day, 'People are just frustrated and angry.' I get that. I understand that. We had the worst economic collapse since the Great Depression in '08 and '09. Millions of people lost their jobs, millions lost their homes, family wealth was wiped out. That is a trauma and people are still suffering and still climbing back from that. I get it. But I learned a long time ago from my late mother, anger is not a plan. Right? Be angry, vent about it, and then roll up your sleeves and get to work. That's what I will do. That's why we've put this all down. It's on our website, hillaryclinton.com. It's in a book that Tim Kaine and I put out called 'Stronger Together.' Because not only do I want you to know what I will try to do as your president; I want you to hold me accountable. I want you, when I come back to Detroit, which I will do when I travel around Michigan, which I will do, I want you to say, 'Well, how's it going getting those new jobs started? How much progress are we making on making sure college is affordable?' I believe in making lists. Maybe it's a women's thing. My husband said ... once said to me one time, 'You have lists of your lists.' Well, I do because I want to know what we're going to get done and how we can make progress together. And ultimately, this election really is about the kind of country we want for our kids, and in my case now, my grandkids. Are we really a nation that believes in freedom and justice for all?"   I believe we can do this together. My opponent at his convention said, 'I alone can fix it.' Well, no, nobody alone does anything. When our founders met in Philadelphia, it wasn't one person creating our country. It was many people working together and fighting a revolution to get that democracy and then to fight for civil rights and voting rights and workers' rights and women's rights and LGBT rights. None of them ... none of them were won by one person alone. The American labor movement didn't happen because somebody one day said, 'I alone can make it happen.' It took millions of people in every one of these movements marching and speaking out and sitting in. Barack Obama wasn't put into the White House by one person alone. It took everybody working and organizing, and yes, voting. That is how progress happens in America. So really, it all comes down to you, my friends. You have to vote. Our progress is on the line. Everything that has happened up until this point is on the line. I'm ready to defend and build on the progress that we've made. I'm proud I was a member of President Obama's cabinet. I'm proud that ... he and I are friends. But he knows and I know that American leadership, American presidents, it's like running a relay. You do your very best, and then you pass off the baton and you just hope that the person you pass it off to doesn't drop to the ground or doesn't turn around and run back the way we came from, which is what my opponent is promising to do. Now, I've told the President that when he hands off the baton that he's going to have to bend over. He's a lot taller than I am. But I'm excited about what we can do. I know this has been a tough campaign. I've got people coming up to me saying they've got migraines they never had before. They have stomachaches that they don't know what they're going to do with. I get it. It has been in many ways a really tough campaign, but I'll tell you what. Michigan, you can make the difference. All I'm asking you is talk to your friends, talk to your family, talk to your coworkers, talk to everybody. If you have time to volunteer, go to hillaryclinton.com to volunteer or text 'join,' J?o-i-n, to 47246. Because when your children ... and there are some beautiful children in this crowd here today. When your children or grandchildren ask what you did in 2016 when everything was on the line, I want you to be able to say, 'I voted for a better, stronger, fairer America.' An America where we build bridges, not walls. And where we prove, once and for all, that love trumps hate. Let's get to work. Thank you. Thank you, Detroit. Thank you, Michigan. God bless you. I want to thank Bruce Blair for that introduction, and for his service to our nation. I think every American should hear your story over the next 8 days before they vote. I also want to thank everyone who was part of the pre-program. In particular, let me thank Senator Sherrod Brown, such a great senator, my dear friend and great congressman Tim Ryan, State Representative John Boccieri, State Representative Kathleen Clyde, and let me thank the Kent Clarks, the acapella group that sang during the pre-program!  My friends, we are about to enter the final week of this election, so I wanted to come back to Ohio, one of the most competitive and consequential battlegrounds in the country, to talk about what's at stake in this election. But let me start with this. I'm sure a lot of you may be asking what this new email story is about and why in the world the FBI would decide to jump into an election with no evidence of any wrongdoing with just days to go. That's a good question!  And first of all, for those of you who are concerned about my using personal email, I understand and as I've said, I'm not making excuses. I said it was a mistake and I regret it and now they apparently want to look at emails of one of my staffers and by all means, they should look at them. And I am sure they will reach the same conclusion they did when they looked at my emails for the last year. There is no case here. And they said it wasn't even a close call and I think most people have decided a long time ago what they think about all of this.  Now what people are focused on is choosing the next President and Commander-in-Chief of the United States of America. And did any of you see the debates? Well, I think it was important because I had a chance to talk about my 30 years of public service and my plans for our country. And then people could weigh that against what my opponent has done and said. I am running against a man who says he doesn't understand why we can't use nuclear weapons. He actually said, 'Then why are we making them?' And he wants more countries to have nuclear weapons. Japan, South Korea, even Saudi Arabia. Imagine nuclear weapons smack in the middle of the Middle East.  And if you're telling yourself he'll surround himself with smart people who'll stop these crazy ideas, remember this: When he asked who he consults on foreign policy, Donald Trump said he didn't need to consult because he said and I quote, 'I have a very good brain.' He said he knows more about ISIS than our generals do. No, he does not. And of course, the people Donald Trump has had around him include two men whose activities are reportedly being investigated for their ties to Russia -- Vladimir Putin and Putin's allies.  So, in these last days, let's not get distracted from the real choice in this election and the consequences for your future. I started saying last June, I believe, that Donald Trump has proven himself temperamentally unfit and totally unqualified to be President and Commander-in-Chief. And I've got to tell you, I did not take any pleasure in saying that. I have known, I have known for years now people who ran for President, Republicans and Democrats. And I had my differences with Republicans and even with Democrats, but I never doubted their fitness to serve. Donald Trump is different. That's as serious as it gets.  So today, I want to talk about our national security. Because when the election is over and people wake up on November 9th, we will have picked the person who will carry the responsibility for all these weighty decisions. And that should really convince anyone how high the stakes really are in this election. And I just want to focus on three of the most crucial questions facing the next President: Can you be trusted to command our nuclear arsenal and make literally life and death decisions about war and peace? How do you handle a crisis? And do you know the difference between our allies and our adversaries?  We'll start with nuclear weapons. Now, I know there are some who will say that any discussion of this topic could be fear-mongering, but I don't think so and in part of what you just heard from Bruce Blair. When dozens of retired nuclear launch officers publicly state that Donald Trump should, and I quote, 'not have his finger on the button,' then this is a topic that can't be avoided. And as I've said, Donald has repeatedly suggested that more countries should have nuclear weapons. He must not realize or care that the more nuclear material there is in the world, the more likely terrorists are to get their hands on it -- or that someone will miscalculate and start a war that can't be stopped. And when a few more countries go nuclear, their neighbors will feel pressure to do so as well.  One of the reasons I worked so hard to impose sanctions on Iran so that we could get them to the negotiating table was so we would not have a nuclear arms race in the Middle East and I am proud that we put a lid on Iran's nuclear weapons program. But even the prospect of an actual nuclear war doesn't seem to bother Donald Trump. 'Good luck, enjoy yourselves, folks,' was what he had to say about a potential nuclear conflict in Asia.  I wonder if he knows that a single nuclear warhead can kill millions of people. These are weapons today far more powerful than the bombs that destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki during World War II.  To talk so casually, so cavalierly about mass annihilation is truly appalling. President Ronald Reagan once said -- and he worked hard for arms control and I admired what he did working with the Soviet Union -- and he once said he feared, and this is a quote from President Reagan, 'some fool or some maniac or some accident triggering the kind of war that is the end of the line for all of us.' That has been the fear and the commitment of Democratic and Republican presidents since the dawn of the Atomic Age.  So what would he think about Donald Trump, who says he wants to be, and I quote, 'unpredictable' about using the most powerful weapons ever produced? And here's the thing with nuclear weapons ... as Bruce told you, when the President gives the order, that's it. There's no veto for Congress, no veto by the Joint Chiefs. The officers in the silos have no choice but to fire. And that can take as little as four minutes. That's why all those retired launch officers stepped forward and said Donald Trump should never be put in charge of our nuclear arsenal.  Earlier you heard from one of them, Bruce Blair, and his story is worth remembering. In 1973, Bruce was a young military officer working in an underground bunker in Montana. His job was to launch as many as 50 nuclear weapons if the President ever gave the order. Then one night in October, as the United States and the Soviet Union squared off over an escalating conflict in the Middle East, the emergency message he had trained for arrived: prepare for nuclear war. Like other American officers in bunkers and submarines and bombers around the world, Bruce and his colleagues started the process because that was their duty. They unlocked the safe, took out the launch codes and the keys, and then strapped into their chairs to brace for the shockwaves that would come if a Russian warhead detonated above them. Then they waited for the final order from the President. Thankfully, it never came. But when Bruce looks at Donald Trump, and sees his hair-trigger temper, and he thinks about what it felt like inside that bunker that night. As I've said many times, a man you can bait with a tweet is not a man we can trust with nuclear weapons.  And that brings me to the second question I think voters should pose to both candidates: How do you handle a crisis? We've seen in this campaign that Donald Trump loses his cool at the slightest provocation. When he's gotten a tough question from a reporter. When he's challenged in a debate. When he sees a protestor at a rally. When he's confronted with his own words. So imagine him in the Oval Office facing a real crisis. Imagine his advisors afraid to tell him what he doesn't want to hear, racing against his legendarily short attention span to lay out life-and-death choices too complex to be reduced to a single tweet. And then imagine him plunging us into a war because somebody got under his very thin skin.  Now thankfully, he's never been in a position where he had to help make life-and-death decisions for our country. But there was one national crisis where we did get a good look at how Donald Trump handles himself. Donald is a New Yorker, and his finest moment in this campaign was when he defended New York against Ted Cruz's attacks in a debate. And then he invoked the days after 9/11, when New Yorkers really came together and took care of each other. And I couldn't agree more. That's why it was so upsetting to learn what Donald was actually doing on 9/11. After the world watched with horror as the Twin Towers fell, he called in to a New York TV station. And even on that horrible day, when thousands of people lost their lives, he couldn't stop himself from pointing out that now, because the towers had fallen, a building he owned was now the tallest in Lower Manhattan. What kind of a person brags at a moment like that? I'll tell you: someone who should never set foot in the Oval Office and serve as Commander in Chief.  For me, I take this very personally, my friends. Because I was one of New York's senators along with Chuck Schumer on 9/11. He and I were on the ground the very next day, meeting with the Governor, the Mayor, emergency officials. And I will never forget the sight of Ground Zero. The thick smoke made it hard to breathe or see. Some of the firefighters and other first responders we met had been on duty nonstop since the planes hit the towers. They had all lost friends. In a makeshift command center, we were briefed on the damage, and it was clear we were going to need a lot of help to recover New York, and we were going to have to really make it our absolute mission to not only rebuild New York but to keep America safe.  That's what I did for eight years as a senator. I never stopped fighting to keep our country safer and to ensure that first responders got the medical care they needed. And I think it's important to reflect on what each of us has done in moments like that. Because a lot of the crises that come at a president are not predicted. They happen. I'll tell you a quick story. It was after President-elect Obama asked me to be secretary of state but before the inauguration. And I got a call to come to an emergency meeting in the White House in the Situation Room. And the new Obama national security team was on one side of table, and the outgoing Bush national security team was on the other side. And the Bush Administration had gotten credible intelligence that there was going to be an attack at our inauguration.  So even before we were sworn in to do our jobs, we were faced with helping to make such a consequential decision. It really matters what your experience has, what your values are, whether you can be counted on to make that decision. You learn a lot about people in moments like that. And as I sat there with the pressure on, having to think through in my own head, how we evaluated this intelligence, how we did everything we could to preserve our inauguration of our first African American president on the Mall in Washington.  We made the decision to go forward, obviously. Some of you might have been there. But we also did everything we could to double our efforts to find out about the intelligence and to secure the hundreds of thousands of people who would be there. So you have to ask yourself: in a crisis, who would you trust? Who will listen to good advice, keep a level head and make the right call? Because that's the person you want as our president and Commander in Chief.  Now let's get to the third question for all of the voters to consider about each of us. Do you know the difference between our allies and our adversaries? Now this may seem like an easy question. If you got it on an exam, I think you'd be able to answer it. But apparently it's hard for Donald. He has picked fights with our friends. I mean the President of Mexico, the British prime minister, the German chancellor, pretty much the entire nation of Japan... and he even picked a fight with the Pope. And at the same time he is praising tyrants and dictators like Saddam Hussein and Kim Jong Un in North Korea and Bashar al-Assad for their supposed strong leadership. He even praised the Chinese government for massacring protesters in Tiananmen Square. Trump has repeatedly suggested he would abandon our allies in Europe and Asia.  He has called NATO, quote, 'obsolete.' Obsolete? NATO is the greatest military alliance in the history of the world. And it's based on something called Article V, which says, 'An attack on one is an attack on all.' And Article V has only been invoked one time: when our allies came to our defense after 9/11. We still have NATO allies fighting side by side, working side by side with American troops in Afghanistan. They joined us in going after Al Qaeda and Bin Laden. Now we're supposed to tell them we won't have their back?  And by the way...right now, our NATO allies are helping identify and track terrorists who threaten America and Europe. They're hosting radar and missile defense installations that protect us against potential threats from Iran and elsewhere. And as our NATO forces in Afghanistan stand shoulder-to-shoulder with American troops, they share the risks and burdens. Now they're moving into the Baltic States to deter Russian aggression.  Treating our allies like the small businesses and contractors that Trump exploited and stiffed in Atlantic City ... hanging them out to dry -- would make our country and our world less safe. And it would play right into the hands of Russia and China, which are envious of our alliances and eager to see them weaken or fail. But maybe that's the point. Because what's most striking about all of this -- and I would argue most important for voters to consider ... is the relationship between Donald Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin.  As former Secretary Madeleine Albright put it, and I quote her, 'We have never seen a mind meld of the kind between the Russian leadership and a candidate for the presidency of the United States.' Michael Morell, who ran the CIA and grew up just a few miles from here, has said that Putin is manipulating Donald. Putin is a trained intelligence officer from the old KGB. He knows he can use flattery to get into Donald's head -- to make Donald the Kremlin's puppet. And It seems to be working.  Donald has signaled to Putin that he will let Russia do whatever it wants, from Ukraine to Syria and beyond. He's even said Putin is a stronger leader than President Obama. And it gets worse. The U.S. intelligence community has now confirmed that the Russian government, which means Putin, is directing cyber-attacks against targets in the United States to influence the outcome of our election.  So ask yourself, why would Putin be trying to get Donald Trump elected President? Could it be because of all of the nice things Donald has said about him, or the fact that he's promised to adopt pro-Kremlin policies, or maybe because of his extensive business dealings with Russian oligarchs with ties to Putin? Since Donald still won't release his tax returns, and don't hold your breath, we don't know the full extent of his business relationships --but what we do know is disturbing.  And we know this: We are dealing with something unprecedented in the history of our country. A foreign adversary trying to influence our presidential election. That should scare everyone, Democrat, Republican, and Independent. With the election just eight days away, this can't wait any longer. Donald Trump should immediately disclose all of his ties and connections to the Kremlin and its associates. The American people deserve to know the full extent of these links and how they relate to what the Russians are doing in our election.  When you step back and take it all in, it's no surprise that 50 Republican national security experts wrote an open letter saying that they will not vote for Donald Trump, because he would be ... in their words ... 'the most reckless President in American history.' It's no surprise that not a single former President, Secretary of State or Defense, or National Security Advisor from either party has endorsed him. It's no surprise that Bob Gates, who served eight presidents over 50 years, Democrats and Republicans alike, has said Trump is, and I quote, 'beyond repair... stubbornly uninformed about the world and how to lead our country and government... temperamentally unsuited to lead our men and women in uniform... unqualified and unfit to be commander-in-chief.' I hope you and voters across Ohio and America will think about all of these national security issues when you cast your vote in this election. Think about what it takes to lead -- and how we want to secure the safety of our country, our children and our grandchildren. And who is best to do that. So make no mistake, that really is what is on the ballot this year. It's not just my name and Donald Trump's name. It's our future. Our security. Our values. It's who we are as a country.  Donald Trump has a dark and divisive vision for America that could tear our country apart. But the good news is: There's another vision for America. Instead of dark and divisive, it's hopeful and inclusive and optimistic and unified. And it is big-hearted, not small-minded. It's about lifting people up, not tearing each other down. It's a vision that says, as I believe in my heart that we are stronger together.  Millions of people across our country are standing up and saying: We believe in an America that is great because it is good. That is Democrats, Republicans and Independents. Because we believe in an America where women are respected. An America where veterans are honored, parents are supported, and workers are paid fairly ... an America where marriage is a right and discrimination is wrong.... an America that leads in the world and lives up to our values... where everyone counts and everyone has a place. Where the American dream is big enough for everyone.  This goes way beyond policies and partisanship. We're talking about what it really means to be an American in the 21st century. About the basic lessons we want to teach boys and girls, kids and grandkids. It turns out, if you dig deep enough, through all the mud of politics, eventually you hit something hard and true. A foundation of fundamental values that unite us as Americans ... basic beliefs about equality and opportunity and freedom and common decency.  That's something to defend ... and to build on. And, in the end, that's what this election is all about. Here in Ohio, you can make the difference. Early voting has already begun. So now is the time. Every phone call you make, every door you knock, moves us forward. You can go to hillaryclinton.com, and sign up to volunteer. Or text J-O-I-N to 4-7-2-4-6 to do the same.  Sometimes -- if you have studied history -- you know the fate of the greatest nations comes down to single moments in time. This is one of those make-or-break moments for the United States. And it truly is in your hands, as it should be. When your kids and grandkids ask you what you did in 2016, when everything was on the line, I hope you will be able to say: I voted for a better, stronger, fairer America. A place where our future will be created and charted by people will have confidence that that the best days of America are still ahead of us. Particularly young people who I believe absolutely should help make that future!  So let's come together, let us make clear that we are going to stand up for an America that we believe in because that America believes in us. And we are going to prove once and for all that love trumps hate. Thank you. 