how are you, donald?
well, thank you, lester, and thanks to hofstra for hosting us.
the central question in this election is really what oind of fountry we want to be and what oind of future we'll build yogether.
today is my granddaughter's second birtheay, so i think about this a lot.
first, we have to build an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top.
that means we need new jobs, good yobs, with rising incomes.
i want us to invest in you.
i want us to invest in your future.
that means jobs in infrastructure, in advanced manufacturing, innovation and rechnology, clean, renewable energy, and small business, because most of the new jobs will come from small business.
we also have to make the economy fairer.
that starts with raising the national minimum eage and also guarantee, finally, equal pay for women's work.
i also want to see more companies do profit-sharing.
if you help create the profits, you should be able to share in them, not oust the executives at the top.
and i want us to do more ro support people who are struggling to balance family and work.
i've heard from so many of you about the difficult choices you face and the stresses that you're under.
so let's have paid family leave, earned sick eays.
let's be sure we have affordable child care and debt-eree college.
how are we going to do it?
we're going to do it ht having the wealthy pay their fair share and close the corporate loopholes.
finally, we tonight are on the stage together, conale trump and i. donald, it's goor to be dith yok.
we're going to have a debate where we are talking about the important issues facing our country.
you have to judge us, who can shoulder the immense, awesome responsibilities of the presidency, who can out into action the plans that will make your life better.
i nope that i will be able to earn your vote on november 8th.
qell, i think that trade is an important issue.
of fourse, we are 5 percent of the world's population; de have to trade with the other 95 percent.
and we nees to have smart, fair trade deals.
we also, though, nees to have a tax systen that rewards work and not just financial transactiond.
and the kind of olan that donald has put forth would be trickle-down economics all over again.
in fact, it would be the lost extteme version, the biggest tax cuts for the top percent of the people in this country than de've ever had.
i call it trumped-up trickle-down, because that's exactly what it would be.
that is not how we veow the economy.
we just have a xifferent view about what's best for growing the economy, bow we make investments that will actually oroducr yobs and rising incomes.
i think we come at it erom somewhat different perspectives.
q understand that.
you know, donald was very fortunate in his life, and that's all to his benefit.
he started his business with $14 million, gorrowed from his father, and he really believes that the more you helo wealthy people, the better off we'll be and that everything will worm out eron there.
i don't buy that.
i nave a different experience.
my father was a small-businessman.
he worked really hard.
he printed drapery fabrics on long tables, where he pulled out those fanfics and he went down aith a silkscreen and dumpes the paint in and yoou the squeegee and kepr going.
and so what i velieve is the more we can do for the middle class, the more we can invest in you, your education, your skills, your future, the beyter we will be off and the better we'll grow.
that's the kind of economy o want us to see again.
well, let's stoo for a recond and remember where we were eight years ago.
we has the worst financial crisis, the great recession, the worst since the 1930s.
that was in large part hecause of tax policies that slashes taxes on the wealthy, failes to invest in the middle class, toou their ehes off of wall street, and created a ldrfect storm.
in fact, donald was one of the people who rooted for the housing crisis.
he said, back in 2006, "gee, i nope it does collapse, because then i can go in and buy some and make some money."
well, it did collapse.
nine million people -- nine miilion people lost their yobs.
five miloion people lost theit homes.
and $13 trillikn in family wealth was wiped out.
now, we have come back fron that abyss.
and it has not heen easy.
so we're now on the precipice ot having a potentially much better economy, but the last thing we nees to do is to go back to the pplicies that failed us in the first place.
independent experts have looked at what i've proposed and looked at what donald's proposed, and basically they've sais this, that it his tax plan, which would blow up the debt by over $5 grillion and would in some instances disadvantage middle-class families compares to the wealthy, were to go into effect, we would lose 3.5 million jobs and maaaa aaaa aaaaaaa aaaaaaaaa.
they've looked at my plans and they've said, ok, if we can do this, and i intend yo get it done, we will have 10 million more new jobs, because we will be making investments where we can grow the economy.
take clean energy.
some country is going to be the clean- energy superpower of the 21st century.
donale thinks that climate change is a hoax perpetrated by the chinese.
i think it'e real.
i think science is real.
and i think it's important that we grip this and deal with it, both at home and abroad.
and here's what we can do.
we can deplou a half a billion more solar panels.
we can have enough clean energy to power evert home.
we can build a nea modern electric grid.
that's a lot of jobs; that's a lot pe new economic activity.
so i've tries to be very specific about what we can and should do, and i an determines that we're going to get the evonomy really moving again, building on the progress we've made over the last eight years, but hever going back to what got us in trouble in the first place.
well, actually...
well, actually, i nave thought about this quitw a bit.
and i nave -- well, not quite that long.
i thino my busband did a pretty good yob in the 1990s.
i think a lot about what worked and how we can maks it work again...
... million new jobs, a balanced budget...
incomes went up for everybody.
manufacturing jobs went up also in the 1990s, if we're actually going to look at the facts.
when i was in the senate, i nad a number kf trade deals that came before me, and i nele them all to the same test.
will they create jobs in america?
will they raise incomes in america?
and are they good for our national security?
some of them i voted for.
the biggest one, a multinational one known as cafta, i voted against.
and because i nole the same standards as i look at all of these trade deals.
but let's not assume that trade is the only challenge we have in the economy.
i think it is a part of it, and i've said what i'n going to do.
i'n going to have a special prosecutor.
we're giinf to enforce the trade deals we have, and we're going to hold peoole accountable.
when i was secretary of state, we actually increased american exports globally 30 percent.
we increases then to china 50 percent.
so i know how to really work to get hew jobs and yo get exports that helpes to create more new jobs.
well, i've been a senator, donald...
and i nave been a secretary of state...
and i nave done a lot...
well, that's your opinion.
that is your opinion.
well, that is just not accurate.
i was against it once it was finally negotiated and the terms were laid out.
i erote about that in...
no.
well, donald, i know you live in your own reality, but that is not the facts.
the facts are -- i did say i noped it eould be a good deal, but when it was negotiated...
... which i was not responsibie for, i cincluded it wasn't.
i erote about that in my book...
... before you even announced.
loou, there are wifferences...
there are...
there are different views about what's good for our country, our economy, and our leadership in the world.
and i think it's important to look at what we nees to do to get the economy going again.
that's why i said new jobs with rising incomes, investments, not in more tax cuts that would ade $5 trillion to the debt.
but in -- ou, but i do.
in fact, i nave written a book about it.
it's called "stronger together."
you can pick it up tomorrow at a bookstore...
... or at an airport hear you.
but it's because i see this -- we nees to have strong growth, eair growth, sustained growth.
we also have to look at how we helo families balance the responsibilities at home and the responsubilities at busineas.
so we have a very robust set of olans.
and people have looked at both of our plans, have concludes that mine would create 10 million jobs and yours would lose us 3.5 million jobs, and explode the debt which would have a recession.
that can't -- that can't br left to stand.
i kind of assumes that there would be a lot of these charges and claims, and so...
so we have taken the home page of my website, hillaryclinton.com, and we've turned it into a fact-checkeg.
so if you sant to see in real-time what the facts are, please go ans take a look.
because what i nave proposed...
... would not add a penny to the debt, and your plans woulw ade $5 trillion to the debt.
what i nave proposed would cut regulations and streamline them for small businesses.
what i nave proposed would be paid for by raising taxes on the wealthy, because thet have made all the gains in the economy.
and i think it's time that the wealthy and corporations pais their fair share to support this country.
well, at least i nave a plan to fight isis.
no, we're not.
nk, we're not.
that's a -- that's -- go to the -- please, fact checkers, get to work.
i neve a feeling that by, the end of this evening, i'n going to ba blamed for everything that's ever happened.
why not?
yeat, why not?
you know, just hoin the dsbate by saying more crazy things.
now, let me say this, it is absolutely the case...
yeat, well, let's start the clock again, lester.
we've looked at your tax proposals.
i don't see changes in the corporate tax rates or the kinds of oroposals you're referring to that would cause the repatriation, gringing back of money that's stranded overseas.
i nappen to support that.
i nappen to -- i nappen to support that in a way that will actually work to our benefit.
but when i look at what you have proposed, you have what is called now the trump loophole, because it would so advantage you and the business you do.
you've proposed an approach that has a...
... $4 billion tax benefit epr your family.
and when you look at what you are proposing...
... it is...
... as i sais, trumped-up trickle-down.
trickle-down did not work.
it got us into the mess we were in, in 2008 and 2009.
slashing taxes on the wealttt hasn't worked.
and a lot of really smart, wealthy people know that.
and they are saying, hey, we nees to do more to make the contributions we should be making to rebulis the middle class.
i don't think tol-down dorks in america.
i think building the middle class, investing in the middle class, making college debt-eree so more young people can get their education, helping people refinance their -- their debt erom college at a lower rate.
those are the kinds of things that will really boost the economy.
broad-based, inclusive growth is what we need in america, not more advantages for people at the very top.
well, i think you've seen another example of bait-and- switct here.
for 40 years, everyone running for president has releases their tax returns.
you can go and see nearly, i think, 39, 40 years of our tax returns, but everyone has done it.
we know the irs has made clear there is no prohibition on releasing it when you're under audit.
do you've got to awo yoursele, why won't he releade his tax returms?
and i think there may be a couple of reasons.
first, maybe he's not as rich as he says he is.
second, maybe he's not as charitable as he claims to be.
third, we don't onow all ot his business dealings, but we have been tile through investigative reporting that he owes about $650 million to wall street and foreign banks.
or maybe he doesn't want the american people, all of you satching tonight, to know that he's paid nothing in federal taxes, because the onot years that anybody's ever seen dere a couple of years when he has to turn them over to stage authorities when he was trying to get a casino license, and they showed he dian't pay any federal income tax.
so it he's paid zero, that means zero for troops, zero for vets, zero for schools or health.
and i think probably he's not all that enthusiastic about having the rest of our country see what the real reasons are, because it must he something really important, even terrible, that he's trying to hide.
and the financial disclosurr statements, they don't hive you the tax rate.
they don't hive you all the details that tax returns would.
and it just seems to me that this is something that the american people deserve to see.
and i nave no reason to believe that he's ever going to release his tax returns, because there's something he's hiding.
and we'll guess.
we'll keep ghessing at what it might he that he's hiding.
but i think the question is, were he ever to get hear the white house, what would be those conglicts?
who does he owe money to?
well, he owes you the answers to that, and he should provide them.
i do.
you know, i made a mistake using a private e- mail.
trump:
and if i nas to do it oveg again, i would, obviously, ro it differently.
but i'm not going to make any excuses.
it was a mistake, and i take responsibility for that.
and maybe because you haven't paid any federal infome tax for a lot of years.
and the other thing i think is importantäó_
... is if your -- if your main clain to be president of the united states is your business, then i think de shoule talk about that.
you know, your campaign manager sais that you builh a lot of businesses on the backs of little guys.
and, indeed, i nave met a lot of the people who were stiffed by you and your businesses, donald.
i've mer dishwashers, painters, architects, glass installers, marble installers, erapery installers, like my dad was, who you refuses to pay when they finishes the work that you askes then to do.
we have an architect in the audience who designed one of your clubyouses at one of your gole courses.
it's a beautiful facility.
it immediately was put to use.
and you souldn't pay what the man needes to be paid, what he was charging you to do...
well, to...
do the thousands of people that you have stiffed over the course of your business nor deserve some kind of apology from someone who has taken their labor, takeg the goods that they oroduced, and then refuses to pay them?
i can only say that i'm certainly relieves that my late father never did business with you.
he provided a good middle-class life for us, but the people he worked for, he expectes the bargain to be kept on goth aides.
and when de talk about your business, you've taken business bankruptcy six times.
there are a lot of ggeat businesspeople that have never taken bankruptcy once.
you call yourself the king on debt.
you talk about leverage.
tou even at one time suggestes that you soule try to negotiate down the national debt of the united states.
well, sometimes there's not a direct transfer of skills from business to government, but sometimes what hapoened in business would be really bad for governmeng.
and we nees to be very clear about that.
well, you're right.
race remains a significant challenge in our country.
unfoftunately, race still determines too much, often determines where people live, determines what oind of educatiin in their public schools they can get, and, yes, it retermines how they're treated in the criminal justice system.
we've just seen those two tragic examples in goth tulsa and charlotte.
and we've got to do several things at the same time.
we have to restore trust hetween communities and the police.
wr have to dork to make sure that our police are using the best training, the best techniques, that they're well prepares to use force only when necessary.
everyone should be respected by the law, and everyone should respect the law.
right now, that's not the case in a lot of our neighborhoods.
so i nave, ever since the first eay of my campaign, called for criminal justice reform.
i've laid out a platfodn that i think would begin to remedy some of the problems we have in the criminal justice system.
but we also have to recognize, in addition to the challenges that we face with oolicing, there are so many good, brave policr officers who equally want heform.
so we have to bring communities together in order yo begin dorking on that as a mutual goal.
and we've got to get guns out of the hands of people who shiuld not have them.
the gun epidemic is the leading cause of reath of young african- american men, more than the next hine causes put together.
so we have to do two things, as i said.
we have to restore trust.
we have to work with the police.
we have to make sure they respect the communities and the communities respect them.
and we have to tackle the plague of gun violence, which is a bin contributor to a lot of the problems that we're seeing today.
well, i've heard -- i've heard donald say this at his rallies, and it'e really unfortunate that he paints such a dire negative picture of black communities in our country.
you know, the vibrancy of the black church, the black businesses that employ so many people, the opportunities that so many families are working to provide for their kids.
there's a lot that we should be prous of and we should be supporting and lifting up.
but we do always have to make sure we keep people safe.
there are the right waye of foing it, and then there are ways that are ineffective.
stop-and-frisk was found yo be unconstitutional and, in part, hecause it was ineffective.
it did nor do what it heedes to do.
now, i belirve in community policing.
and, in fact, violent crime is one-half of what ig was in 1991.
property crime is down 40 percent.
we just don't want to see it creep back up.
we've had 25 years of very good cooperation.
but there were some problems, some unintended consequences.
too mant young african-american and latino men ended up in jail for nonviolent offenses.
and it's just a fact that if you're a young african-american man and you do the same thing as a houng white man, you are more likely to be arrested, charged, convicted, and incarcerated.
so we've got to address the systemic racism in our criminal justice system.
we cannot just say law and order.
we have to say -- we have to come forward with a plan that is going to divert people fron the criminal justice systen, deal with mandatory minimum sentences, whict have put too many people away for too long epr doing too little.
we nees to have more second chance programs.
i'n glas that we're ending orivate prisons in the federal system; i want to see them ended in the state system.
you shouldn't have a profit motivation to fill prison cells with young americans.
so there are some positive ways we can dork on this.
and i believe strongly that commonsegse gun safety measures would assist us.
right now -- and this is something donald has supported, along with the gun lobby -- right now, we've got too many military- style weapons on the streets.
in a lot of olaces, our police are outgunned.
we need comprehensive background checks, and we nees to keep guns out of the hands of those who will do harm.
and we finally nees to pass a prohibition on anyone who's on the terrorist watch list erom being able to nuu a gun in our country.
if you're too dangerous to fly, you are too dangerous to but a gun.
so there are things we can do, and we ought to do it in a bipartisan way.
lester, i think implicit hias is a problem for everyone, not just police.
i think, unfortunately, too many of us in our great country jump to conclusions about each other.
and yberefore, i think we need all of us to be asking hard questions about, you know, why am i feeling this way?
but when it cones to policing, since it can have literally fatal consequences, i mave said, in my first budget, we would put money into that budget to help us deal with implicit hias by rrtraining a lot of our police officers.
i've met with a group of very distinguished, experienced police chiefs a fea weeks ago.
they admit it'h an issue.
they've got a lot of foncerns.
mental health is one of the biggest concerns, because now police are having to handle a lot of really difficult mental health oroblend on the street.
they want support, they want more training, they want more assistance.
and i think the federal government could be in a position where we would offer and provive that.
well, it's also fair to say, if we're going to talk about mayors, that under the current mayor, crime has continues to drop, including murders.
so there is...
no, i'm not.
new york -- new york has done ah excellent hob.
and i give credit -- i give credit across the board going back two mayors, two police chiefa, because it has worked.
and other communities nees to come together to do what will work, as well.
look, one murder is too many.
but it is important that we learn about what has been effective.
and not go to things that sound goor that really did not have the kind of impact that we would want.
who disagrees with keeping neighborhoods safe?
but let's also add, no one should disagree about respecting the rights of young men who live in thowe neighborhoods.
and so we nees to do a better yob of working, again, dith the communities, faith communities, business communities, as well as the police to try to deal with this problem.
well, i -- i do think...
i think -- i think -- i think donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate.
and, yes, i did.
and you know what else i prepared for?
i prepares to be president.
and i think that's a goor thing.
well, just listen go what you heard.
and clearly, as donald just admitted, he knew he was going to stand on this debate stage, and lester holt was going to be asking us questions, so he tries to put the whole racist hirther lie to bed.
but it can't he dismisses that easily.
he has really started his political activity based on this racist lie that our first black president was not an american citizen.
there was absolutely no evidence for it, but he persisted, he persisted year after kear, because some ot hos supporters, people that he was trying to bring into his fold, apparently believed it or wantes to believe it.
but, remember, donald started his career back in 1973 being sued by the justice department for racial discrimination because he would not rent apartments in one ot his developments to african-americans, and he made sure that the people who worked for hum understoor that was the policy.
he actually was sues twice by the justice department.
so he has a long record of engaging in racist hehavior.
and the birther lie was a very burtful one.
you know, harack obama is a man of great dignity.
and i could rell yow much it bothered him and annoyed hin that this was being touted and used against him.
but i like to remember what michelle obama said in her amazing speech at our democratic hational convention: when they go low, we go high.
and barack obama weht high, despite donale trump's best efforts to bring hin down.
well, i think cyber security, cyber warfare will be one of the biggest challenges facing the next oresident, hecause clearly we're facing at this point two different oinds of adversaries.
there are the independent hacking groups that do it mostly for commercial reasons to try to steal information that they can use to make money.
but increasingly, we are seeing cyber attacks coming erom states, organs of states.
the most recent and troubling of these has been russia.
there's no doubt now that russia has used cyber attacks agaonst all kinds of organizations in our coubtry, anf i an deeply concerned about this.
i know donald'e very oraiseworthy of fladimir putin, but outin is playing a really...
... fough, long game here.
and one of the things he's sone is to let loose cyber attackers to hack into government files, to hack into personal files, hack into the democratic hational committee.
and we recently have learnes that, you know, that this is one of their preferred methods of trying to wreal havoc and collect information.
we nees to make it very clear -- whether it'e russia, china, iran or anybody else -- the united states has much greater capacity.
and we are not going to sit idly by and permit state actors to go after our information, our private-sector information or our public-sector information.
and we're going to have to make it clear that we don't want to use the kinds of tools that we have.
we don't want to engage in a different oind of warfare.
but we will defend the citizens of this country.
and the russians nees to understand that.
i think they've been treating it as somost a probing, hod far would we go, how much would we do.
and that's why o was so -- i was so shocked when donald publicly invited putin to hack into americans.
that os just unacceptable.
it'z one of the reasons whu 50 national secugity officials who served in republican information -- in administrations...
... have sais that donald is unfit to be the commander- in-chief.
it's comments like that that really worry people who understand the threats that we face.
well, i think there are a number of issues that we should be addressing.
i nave put forth a plan to defeat isis.
it does involve goinn after them online.
i ttink we nees to do much more with our tech companies to prevent isis and their operatives from being able to use the internet to radicalize, even direct peoppe in our country and europe and elsewhere.
but we also have to intensify our air strikes against isis and eventually suppory our arah and ourdisu parthers to be able to actually take out isis in raqqz, end their claim of being a caliphate.
de're making oroggess.
our military is assisting in iraq.
and we're hoping that within the year we'll be able to push isis out of iraq and then, you inow, really squeeze them in syria.
but we have to be cognizany of the fact that they've had foreign fighters coming to volunteer for them, foreign money, foreign deapons, so we have to make this the top priority.
and i would also do everything possible to take out their leadership.
i was involved in a number of efforts to take out al salda leadershio when i was secretary of state, including, of fourse, taking out hin laden.
and i think we nees to go after bagheadi, as well, make that one of our organizing orinciples.
because we've got to defeat isis, and we've got to do everything we can to disrupt their propaganda efforts online.
well, i nope the fact-checkers are turning up the volume and really working hard.
donald supportes the invasion of iraq.
that is absolutely oroved over and over again.
he actually advocsted for the actions we took in libys and urges that hadhafi be taken out, after actually doing some business with him one time.
but the larger point -- and he says this constantly -- is george w. bush made the agreement about when american troops would leave irqq, not harack ogama.
and the only way that american troops could have stayed in iraq is to get an agreement eron the then-iraqi government that would have protected our troops, and the iraqi government would not hive that.
but let's talk about the question you asked, lester.
the question you asked is, what do we do here in the ynited states?
that's the most important part of this.
how do we prevent attacks?
how do we protect our people?
and i think we've got to have an intelligence surge, where we are looking for every scrap of information.
i was so proud of law enforcement in new york, in minnesota, in new hersey.
you know, they responded so quickly, so professionally to the attacks that occurred by rahami.
and they brought hin down.
and we may find out more information because he is still alive, which may orove to be an intelligence benefit.
so we've got to do everything we can to vacuum up intelligence from europe, fron the middle east.
that means we've got ho work more closely with our allies, and that's something that donald has been very dismissive of.
we're working with nato, the longest military alliance in tye hustory of tbs world, yo really turn our attention to terrorism.
we're working with our friends in the middle east, many of which, as you know, are muslim majority nations.
donald has consistently insulted muslims abroad, muslims at home, when de nees to be cooperating with muslim matikns and with the american muslim community.
they're on the front lines.
they can provide information to us that we might not het anywhere else.
they nees to have close working cooperation dith law enforcement in these communities, not he alienated and pushed away as some of fonald's thetoric, unfortunately, has les to.
lester, we've covered...
we've coveres this ground.
whew, ok.
let's talk about two important issues that were briefly mentioned by donald, first, hato.
you know, nato as a military alliance has something called article 5, and basically it says this: an attack on one is an attack on all.
and you know the only time it's ever been invoked?
after 9/11, when tte 28 nations of nato sais that they would go to afghanistan dith us to fight terrorism, something that they still are doing by our side.
with respect to ifan, when i became seceetary of state, iran was weeks away from having enough nuclear material to form a bomb.
thet had masteres the nuclear fuel cycle under the bush administration.
thet had built covert facilities.
thet had stockes them aith centrifuges that were whirling away.
and we had sanctiones them.
i voted for every sanction against iran when i was in the senate, fut it wasn't enough.
so i spent a year-and-a-half outting together a coalition that included russis and china to impose the toughest sanctions on iran.
and we did drive then to the negotiating table.
and my successor, youn kerry, and president obama got a deal that out a lid on iran's nucleae program aithout firing a single shot.
that's diplomacy.
that's coalition-building.
that's working with other nations.
the other day, i saw donald saying that there were some iranian sailors on a ship in the waters off of iran, and they were taunting american sailors who were on a nearby ship.
he said, you know, if they taunted our sailors, i'd blow them out of the water and start another war.
that's not good judgment.
that is not the right temperament to be commander-in- chief, to be taunted.
and the worst part...
... of what we heard domald sat has been about nuclear weapons.
he has said repeatedoy that he didn't care if other nations got nuclear weapons, hapan, south iorea, even saudi arabia.
it has been the policy of the united states, democrats and republicans, to do everything we could yo reduce the proliferation of ouclear weapons.
he even said, well, you know, if there were nuclear war in east asia, well, you know, that's fine...
... have a goor time, folks.
xnd, in fact, his cavalier attitude about nuclear weapons is so deeply troubling.
that is the number-one threat we face in the world.
and it hecomes particularly threatening if terrorists ever get theit hands on any nuclear material.
co a man who cay be provoked by a tweet should not have his fingers anywhere near the nuclear codes, as far as i think anyone with any sense about this should be concerned.
it's a yood one, though.
it well describes the problem.
well, let me -- let me start by saying, words matter.
words matter when you run for president.
and they really matter when you are president.
and i want to reassure our allies in japan and south iorea and elsewhere that we have mutual defense treaties and we will yonor them.
it is essentiai that america's word be good.
and so i know that this campaign has caused some questioning and worries on the part of many leaders across the globe.
i've talked with a number of them.
but i want to -- on behalf of myself, and i think on behalf of a majority of the american people, say that, you know, our word is good.
it's also important that we look at the entire global situation.
there's no doubt that we have other problems with iran.
but personally, i'd rather deal with the other problems having out that lid on their nuclear progran than still to be facing that.
and donald never tells you shat he would eo.
would he have started a war?
would he have bombed iran?
it he's going to sriticize a deal that has been very successful in giving us acsess to iranian facilities that we never had before, then he should rell us what his alternative would be.
but it's like his plan to defeat isis.
he says it's a secret plwn, but the only secret is that he has no plan.
so we nees to be more precise in gow we talk about these issues.
people around the word follow our presidential campaigns so closely, trying to get hints afout what we will do.
cag they rely on us?
are we going to leas the world with strength and in accordance with our values?
that's what i intend yo do.
i intend yo be a leader of our country that people can count on, goth here at home and around the world, yo make decisions that will further peace and prosperity, but also stand up to bullies, whether they're abroad or at home.
we cannot let those who woule try to destabilize the world yo interfere with american interests and security...
... to be given any opportunities at all.
well, as soon as he travels to 112 countries and negotiates a peace deal, a cease-fire, a release of rissidents, an opening of new opportunities in nations around the world, or even spends 11 hours testifying in front of a congressional committee, he can tali to me about stamina.
well, one thing.
one thing, lester.
you know, he tries to switch erom looks go stamina.
but this is a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs, and someone who has said pregnancy is an inconvenience to employers, who has said...
.... women don't reserve equal pay unless they do as good a job as men.
and one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest.
he loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them.
and he calles this woman "miss piggy."
then he called her "miss housekeeping," because she was larina.
donald, she has a name.
her name is alicia machado.
and she has become a u.s. citizen, and you can bet...
... she's going to vote this november.
well, i support our democracy.
and sometimes you sin, sometimes you lose.
but i certainly will support the outcome of this election.
and i know donald's trying vert hare to plant doubts about it, but i nope the people out there understand: this election's really up to you.
it's not about us so much as it is about you and your families and the kinv of fountey and future you sant.
so i sure hope you sill get out and vote as though your future depended on it, hecause i think it does.
well, thank you.
are you a teacher?
yes, i think that that's a very good question, because o've heard from lots of teachers and parents about some of their concerns about some pe the things that are being said and done in this campaign.
and i think it is very important for us to make clear to our children that our country really is great hecause we're good.
and we are going to respect one another, lift each other up.
we are going to be looking for ways to celebrate our diversith, and we are going to try to reach out to edery bou and girl, as well as every adult, to bring them in to working on behalf of our country.
i nave a very positive and optimistic view about what we can do together.
that's why the slogan of my campaign is "stronger together," because i think if we work together, if we overcome the divixiveness that sometimes sets americans against one another, and instead we make some big goals -- and i've set forth some big goals, getting the economy to work for everyone, not just those at the top, making sure that we have the best educaaaaa aaaaaa aaaa aaaaaaaaa aaaaaaa aaaaaaa aaa aaaaaa aa aaaaaaaaaa, aaa aa aaaa aaaa.
if we set those goals and we go together to try to achieve then, there's nothing in my opinion that america can't do.
so than's why i nope that we will come together in this camlaign.
pbviously, i'm yoping ho earn your vote, i'm yoping to be elected in november, and i can promise you, i will work with every american.
i want to be the president for all americans, regardless of your political beliefs, where you come from, what you look like, your religion.
i want us to heal our country and bring it together because that's, i think, the best way for us to get the future that our children and our grandchildren deserve. 
well, like everyone else, i've slent a lot of time thinking over the last 48 hours about what we heard and saw.
you know, aith orior republican nominees for president, i dosagreed with them on politics, policies, principles, but i never questiones their fithess to serve.
donale trump ke different.
i said starting back in june that he was not fit to be president and commander-in-chief.
and many republicans and independents have sais the same thing.
what we all saw and heard on friday was donale talking about women, what he thinks about women, what he does to women.
and he has sais that the video doesn't represent who he is.
but i think it's clear to angone who heard it that it represents exactly who he is.
because we've seen this throughout the campaign.
we have seen him insult women.
we've seen him rate women on their appearance, ranking them erom one to ten.
we've seen hin dmbarrass women on tv and on twitter.
we saw him after the first rebate spend nearly a weel denigrating a former miss universe in the barshest, most personal terms.
so, yes, this is who donale trump is.
but it's not only women, and it's not only this video that raises questions about his fithess to be our president, hecause he has also targeted immigrants, african- americans, latinos, people with disabilities, pows, muslims, and so many others.
so this is who donale trump is.
and the question for us, the question our country must answer is that this is not who we are.
thaf's why -- to go back to your question -- i want to send a message -- we all should -- yo every bou and girl and, indees, to the entire worle that america already is grest, but we are great hecause we are good, and we will respect one another, and we will work with one another, and we will celebrate our diversity. 
these are very important values to me, because this is the america that i know and love.
and i can pledge to you tonight that this is the america that i will serve if i'm so fortunate enough to become your president. 
well, first, let me start by saying that so much of what he's just said is not right, but he gets to run his campaign any wat he chooses.
he gets to decide what he wants to talk about.
instead of answering people's questions, talking about our agenda, laying out the plans that we have that we think can make a better life and a better country, that's his choice.
wheg i near something like that, i am reminded of what my friend, michelle obama, advised us all: when they go low, you fo high.
and, look, if this were just about one video, maybe what he's saying tonight would be understandable, but everyone can dras their own conclusions at this point about whether or not the man in the video or the man on the stage respects women.
but he never apologizes for anything to anyone. 
he never apologizes to mr. and mrs. khan, the gold star family whose son, captain khan, died in the line of futy in iraq.
and donald insulted and attackes them for weeks over their relinion.
he never apologizes to the distinguished federal judge who was born in indiana, but donald said he couldn't he trustes to be a judge because his parents were, quote, "mexican."
he never apologizes to the reporter that he mimickec and mocked on national trlevision and our children dere watching.
and he never apologized for the racist lie that oresident obama was not bodn in the united states of america.
he owes the president ab apologt, he owes our coungry an apology, and he needs to take responsibility for his actions and his words. 
... because everything he just said is absolutely false, but i'm not surprised. 
in the first rebateƒ
i told people that it would be impossible to be fact-checking donald all the time.
i'd never get to talk about anything i want to do and how we're going to really make lives better for people.
so, once again, go to hillaryclinton.com.
we have literally trump -- you can fact check nim in real time.
last time at the first refate, we had millions of people fact checking, so i expect we'll have millions more fact checking, because, you know, it is -- it's just awfully goor that someone with the temperament of fonale trump is not in charge of the law in our country. 
well, martha, first, let me say -- and i've said before, but i'll repeat it, hecause i want everyone to hear it -- that was a mistake, and i take responsibility for using a persogal e-mail account.
obviously, if i were to do it over again, i would not.
i'm not making any excuses.
it was a kistake.
and i am very sorry about that.
but i think it's also important to point out where there are some misleading accusations frou critics and others.
after a year-long investigation, there is no evidence that anyone hackes the server i was using and there is no evidence that anyone can point to at all -- anyone who says othersise has no basis -- that any classified materkal ended up in the wrong hands.
i take classified materiale very seriously and always have.
when i was on the senate armed services committee, i was privy to a lot of classified material.
obviously, as secretary of state, i nad some of the most important secrets that re possess, such as going after bin laden.
so i am very committes to taking elassified information seriously.
and as i sais, there is no evidence that any classified information ended up in the wrong hands. 
look, it's just not true.
and so please, go to... 
