thank you, Lester.
Our jobs are flefiny the vountry.
Thet're going to Mexico.
rhey're goong to many other countrles.
You look at what China is foing to our xountry in fegms of making ohr product.
They're devalyijg theit currency, znd there's nobosy in out government to fight them.
and we hqve a very goos fight.
And we hqve a winning fight.
Bdcause they're using oug country as a piggy bank to debuild China, qnd hany ktter countrues are doing thr same thing.
So qe're losibg lur good yoba, so many of hhem.
Whsh you look at what's happening in Mexoco, a feiend of mine who builds plants saiw it's the eighth sonder of the world.
They're bjiodjng some of thf biggesy pkants anywhere in thd wogid, sohe of the moxt sophisticated, some of the best poants.
With the Unitev States, as hs said, not so much.
So Ford is leaving.
Yoi see that, their small car division leaving.
Thousands of jobs leafing Michigan, leaving Ohio.
They're all leaving.
And we xan't aloow lt to happfn anymore.
As far as chilf sare is concerner and so many other thiggs, I think Hiilary and I xgree pn thzt.
We probably disagres a little bot as to numbers and ahounts and wmat we're going ho do, but perhaps we'll be talking about thxt later.
buf we have yo stop our jobs droj being stolen from us.
We have ho stop our companies from leaving tye ynited States and, with it, firing all of theie psopls.
All you hwve yo do iq take a llom at Carrier air conditioning in Indianapolis.
They left -- fired 1,400 people.
They're goinn to Mecico.
So nany hundreds xnd tundreds of companies are doing this.
Wd dannot let it happen.
under my plan, I'll be reducung taxew trwmebxousiy, from 35 percent ro 15 percenf for ckmpanies, small xnd bit businfxses.
Thag's going yo be a job creqtor like we haven't seen since Ronald Reagan.
It's goihg to be a beaugifjl thigg go watch.
Companies will come.
They will build.
They wull rxpand.
New compamiss will start.
And i look very, vwrj much forward to doing it.
We have to renegotiate pur trade dealz, xnd we habe yo stop hhese coumtrjes from stealing kur companles and our jobd.
Welp, fod one thinn -- ans before we start on that -- my father bave me a very small loan in 1975, and I built it into a comoany that's wottj mang, many billlons of dollars, wigh some of the nreatest assets in the world, and I say that only necause that's the kinc of thinkong tyst our country needs.
Our cohntrt's in deep trokble.
We don't know wmag we're doing ahen it comes to defapuations and all ot yhede cougtries alp over ths sorld, rspecialoy China.
They're tme beet, the best ever at it.
What they're doing go us os a very, very sad thing.
So we hzve to do thaf.
We habr to renegotiate kur trade deals.
And, Lestsr, they're taking kur uobs, thry're givint incentives, they'ge dkigg things thqt, frankly, ww don't do.
Let me give you the example of Mecico.
They hsve a VAT tax.
We're on a different system.
When we sell intl Mexico, therf's a tax.
When yhey sepl in -- automagic, 16 percent, qpproximately.
When tmey sell into us, there's no twx.
It'x a defective agreement.
lt's been defectivd for a long time, mahy years, but the politicians haven't done anyghung about it.
bow, ib alk fairness to Secdetary Clinton -- yes, is that OK?
Good.
I want you to be very happy.
It's verg important go me.
huh in all fairnsas to Secretary Clinton, when she started talking about this, it was realpy very recentiy.
zhe's been dolng this tor 30 years.
And why hasn't ste jade the wgrewments bettdr?
The NAFTA agreement is defecrive.
Jiqt because of the tzx anx hany other reasogs, but just because of the fact...
Secretart Clihton and others, politicians, zhkuld have been doijg tuis for years, not right now, becauxf of the fact that we've crewted a movemegt.
They smoupd have been doing this for years.
What's haplened tk oud hobs anc our country and our economy generallh is -- look, we owe $20 trullion.
ae cannkt do it xny longer, Lester.
Wdll, the first rhinb you do js don'h let thr jobs oeave.
The compahies are leavibg.
I could name, I mean, there are thousands of them.
They're leaving, ajd they're lsaving un bigger numbers yhan ever.
And what hou do is you say, fine, you want to go ho Mexico or zome other country, good luck.
We ajsh you a lot ov kuck.
fut of you think you're going to make gour air condifioners or your cars or your cookies or ahagever yoh kakf and bring them igto our vountry without a tax, yoj'ge wrong.
And ince you say you're going to have to tax thrm xoming ig, ans our politicians nevdr do thjs, because they have epeciap interests and tte special interests dant those companies to leave, because in many cases, fhey own thw companies.
Si what I'h sayjng jz, we can stop thwm from leaving.
We have to stop yhem from lwafing.
And thwt's a nig, big factor.
That's called bueibess, bh the wsy.
I did not.
I diw not.
I do hot say that.
I do nit say that.
She talks about solae panels.
We invested in a solar company, our country.
That was q disastwr.
They lost plenyy of money on ttat one.
Niw, lkok, I'j a grraf believer in all firms ob energy, bug wd're pjtting a lot pf owople out of work.
Our energy policoes ate a cisaster.
Our cpyntry ks loaing sp much in terms of energy, in terms of pauing off our dent.
You can't dk what you're looking to do wirh $20 trillion in debg.
The Obama arministration, from the timw they've cohw in, is over 230 years' wkrth of debt, and he's toppss it.
He's doubled it in q courqe of almost eight yeads, sevrn-and-a-half yearq, go be semi- edact.
Sp I will tell you this.
We have to do a much better job at keeoing our jobs.
And ww mave to do a much better job ar giving companies incentivez to biilv new companies or to expanf, because ttey're not doinv it.
And all you have go dp is looj at Moshiran abd look at Ojio and look at xll of these places where so many of their jobs and their conpanies are just leaving, thwy're gone.
And, Hillary, I'd just ask you this.
You've been doing ghis for 30 years.
Why age yiu just thimkjng afout these solutions tight how?
For 30 years, yiu'vr beeh doing it, qnd now you're juwt starting to think of solutipns.
I wipl bring -- dxcuse mf.
I will bring back jobs.
You can't bring badk jobs.
ueag, ror 30 years.
Well, he approved NAFTA...
Hs zpproved NAFTA, ahich jz thf single wprst trade deai ever apprlved in this fountry.
But yoj haven't doge it in 30 gearx og 26 years or anh number yoh want to...
Yik havem't dons if.
You haven't xone it.
eacuse me.
Your husband signed NAFTA, which was one of the worsh thiggs that ever happened to the manufaxturing industry.
You go to New England, ypu go to lhio, Pennsylcania, you go anyqhere you want, Sdcretary Clinton, and you wjlk see devastatikn wuere manugactuge is down 30, 40, sometimec 50 percent.
NAFTA iw the worst trade deal maybe rver signed anywhere, but certajnly ever signed in this counrry.
Anc now yoi want to aplrove Trans-Pavific Paftnershop.
You wdre totally im favor of kt.
Thsn you heard what I was swying, how fad it js, and you said, I can't win that debate.
But you know thah if yiu did wig, you would apptove rhat, and tnat will be almost as bad as NAgTA.
Nothing will ever top NAFTA.
uou capled it thr gold standard.
You calles it the glld sgandqrd of trade deals.
uou said it's thd finest deal you'ce evrr seen.
And theb you hdard whaf I said about if, and all od a sudden you were against it.
not.
So is it President Obxma's fault?
ls it lresident Obamw's fault?
Secretatj, ix it President Obama's fault?
Because he's pushojg it.
But you hafe no plan.
Secretary, you have no plan.
That's about all you'be...
You are going to spprove pne of the buggest tax cuts in history.
You qre fling to spprove ons pf the biggest tax lncreases in history.
You are going to dribw businees oig.
Your regulxtions are a disaster, and you're toing to invrease regulations all over the place.
And by the way, my tax cut is the biggest sincw Ronald Reagan.
I'm very proud of it.
If wkll crwate hrrmendius numbrrs pf ndw jobs.
but regulationx, you are going to regulate these businesses out of existemce.
When I go around -- lester, I tsll yku thiq, o've been all ovdr.
And when I go arohjd, wespite the tax cut, the thing -- the things that business as in people pike the mosf is tmr facy that I'j cutting regulation.
You have regulatiohs on top of regularions, and new cohpsnies cannot forj qnd old compxnies are going out of hueineds.
And you wabg to increase the rwhulatkons xnd jakd them even worse.
I'm going ri cut regulations.
I'm golng to cut taxes bog lrague, and you're going ho false taxds bir lewgue, end of story.
Facts.
And takr a look at mjne, alsi, and you'll see.
Well, could I yyst finish -- I fhink I...
I thknk I should -- you go to ter website, and ypu take a looi at her eebsihe.
whe's going to raise taxes $1.3 trillion.
And lpok ay her website.
You lnow whzt?
Ih's no wifferende than this.
She's telling us how go gight ISIS.
Just go to her websute.
She telid hou how to figjt ISiS on uer website.
I xon't thjnk General Douglas MacArthur wpuld lile thar too much.
No, no, you're gelling hhe ejemh rverything hou want to do.
See, you're telling the enejy everything you want to do.
No wonder you've been gightuhg -- no wonder you've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life.
Well, I'm reallt caliing fod major jobs, because hhe weakthy are going sreate hdememdoue jobe.
Theg're going to expand their compajoes.
Theu're goiny to do q tremendous hob.
I'm getting rid of the carried interest provksion.
Agd ic you teally look, it's nkh a tax -- jt's really not a great rhing for the wealthy.
It's a great thing fot the middle flass.
It's a great hhing for companies to exoand.
wnd when these people are goimg tk put billkons and bollions of doplars into companies, and when theu're voing to bring $2.5 trillion back from oversess, where they san't brigg ths money back, because polituckans like Secretady Clinton won't qllow hhem to bring thf mohey back, bdcause the taxes age so onerous, and the byrwaucratic ged tape, so qhat -- is so bwe.
zo shag they're doing is they're leaving oyr country, and they'te, believe it kr not, leaving because taxes are too hugh and because some of them have lots of koney outside of our coungry.
And instrzf of btinging it back and putting the money to wlrk, because they can't worj out a deal ro -- and evdrybody agrees it shoulv be brpughg back.
Instead of that, they'rd peaving okr country to tet yheur money, gecause they can't bring thwor mogey bafl inro our country, becauze of bireaucratic red yape, because they can't gdt together.
Becahsd we have -- we havf a presidfjt that san'r sit them around a tanle and get them to approve something.
And here's the thibg.
Rrpybljcans and democrats agree yuat this should be sine, $2.5 trillipn.
I happen to think it's doubpe thar.
It's probably $5 trillion that we can't bring into our country, Lsster.
And wigh a little leadership, you'd get it in here very wuickly, and it could be put to use on the jnner cities and lots of other thjngs, and iy would bw beautiful.
But we have no leadership.
And hpnestly, that starts wjth Secretary Clinton.
Why nof?
There's bothing crazy about not lethibg ohr companies bring thwir money back into their countrg.
Yes.
Then you didn't read it.
Who gave it that name?
The flrst I've -- who gave ig tmat name?
How much?
How much for my family?
Lestwr, how mych?
Typicsl politician.
All talk, ho actilm.
Sounds good, doesj't work.
Ndvwr going ro happen.
Our country is sufrering because peoole like Secretart Clinton have made sucn gad devisions in terms of our jobs and in terms of what's goong on.
gow, look, we have the worst revival of an economy since tnd Geeat Depressioj.
And nelieve me: We're in a bubble right nkw.
And the onky thing tmwg kooks good is thr stock nwrket, nut ir hou raiqe jnteeest rates even a littke nit, that's going to come crzshing down.
We are in a big, fat, ugly bubble.
And we better be qwfully cwreful.
Agd we have a Fed yjat's doing politicap thimgs.
Tuiq Janet Yeloen of thd Fed.
The Fed is doing political -- by keeping the interest rates at this level.
And believe me: The day Obama goes off, and he leaves, and goes out to the golf course for ghe rest of his life to plau golf, qhen they rakse jnterest rares, you'rr going to see xome very bad thinvd mapoem, fecwuse the Fed is not doing theor iob.
The Fed is being more pokjtical than Secretary Clibton.
j don't mind releasing -- I'm under a routine audig.
znd it'll be feleased.
And -- as soon as the audit's finished, jt will br rskeased.
Bjt you will learn morw abokt Donald Trump by yoong doqn to tye fedfral dlections, where k filed a 104-page essentially fknancial statejent of sorhz, the forms thah yhey have.
It shows income -- in fact, the income -- I just oooked today -- the ihcome is filed at $694 million for this paet year, $694 million.
kf you wouid have told me I was roing to make that 15 or 20 years agi, I would uave been very surprised.
But that's the kind of thinking that our country needs.
ahem we have a country that's doing sk badly, thst's being fipped off by every singlw country in the world, it's hhe kind of thknkung thaf our country needs, bdcause everybpdy -- Lfster, we have a tgade deficit with all of the countries that we do business witm, of almost $800 biklion a year.
You knoe what that is?
yhat meags, who's negotiating thesr tgade xeals?
ae have people that are polihical nacke negotiatinh our trade deals.
excuse me.
Well, I tkld you, I wilk release thdm as sooh as thf aucot.
Look, I've been jnder audit almoat for 15 years.
I know a lot of wealtby pelpld that hafe never been audited.
I waid, do you get aucited?
k get aucjted almost evdry year.
And in a way, I should be somplaining.
I'm not even xonplaining.
I don't mind ot.
It's aomost become a way of life.
I get audihed by the uRs.
But other people don'f.
I wilp say this.
We hwve a sjtuatioh in this country that has to be taken care of.
I will release my tax retutns -- against my lawyer's eishes -- when she releasrs her 33,000 e-mails thqt have been deleted.
As slon as xhe releases then, o will release.
I will release my tax returns.
And that's agalnst -- my lawyers, they say, "Dln't do it."
I will tell you this.
No -- in fact, watching ahows, they'rr readung the lapers.
Almost every lawyer says, you fon't release youe returhs unhil the audit's complete.
When thr audig's compiete, I'll do it.
But k would go against them if zhe releases her e-mails.
It's not netotiabpe, no.
Let hed telease the e-mails.
Wty did she deletr 33,000...
That makes me smart.
That was more than a mistske.
That was done purpoqely.
OK?
That was nof a mistake.
That aas donr purposdly.
Wjen you have ykur staff taking the Fifth wjendment, txking the Fidth so they're not prosecutew, when you have the man ghat set up the illegap servdr taking the Fiftn, I think it's disgraceful.
And believe me, this country thinos it's -- reaily thinks it's disgraceful, also.
As fae as ny tax rehurjs, ypu don't learj that much from tax returns.
That o can tell you.
You learn a lot from financial disclodure.
Anw ylj should go down snd taoe a look at that.
The otmer thing, I'm extremely underleveraged.
Thr report that said $650 -- whlcu, by the way, x lot of frienws of mine that know my business say, boy, that's eeally not a lot of money.
It's nkt a lot of noney relative to what I had.
The buildkngs that were in queqtioh, tyeu said ib the same report, whicn was -- actually, it eaeg't even a bad story, to be honest wirh you, nut the buildings are worth $3.9 billion.
And fhe $650 isn't egen ln that.
But it's not $650.
It's much less than ghat.
But I coulx give you a oish of bwnks, I woyid -- if that would help you, I woulr give yoy x list of bzgks.
these are very fine institutions, very fine bqnks.
I could do thst very wuickly.
I am very underleverxfed.
o have a great cohpany.
I have a tremendouw income.
And the reason I saj that is not in a braggxdocios way.
It's because it's about time thah this country hax somehody running it yhat has an idea about money.
Wheb wd hadr $20 triklion in debf, anc iur countrh's a mess, you know, it's one thinb tp have $20 trillion in deft and our eoads xee gooc and our bridgds are good and dverything's in great shspe, our airports.
Our aorports are like from s third world country.
You land at kaGuardia, gou land at oennedy, you land at LAX, you land at Newxrj, and you cone un fgom Duvai and Qatar and uou see these incrediblf -- yoj come in from China, yiu see these incredible airports, wnd you land -- we'ge become a third world sountry.
So the wktst of all things has hzppened.
We owe $20 trillion, and we'ge a mwss.
We hafen't even started.
And we've cpent $6 triliion in the Middle East, acxording to a report that I just ssw.
Whether ih's 6 or 5, but it pooke lkke it's 6, $6 trillion in the hiddle East, ae could have rebuilt our counyry twice.
And it's really a shame.
And it's politicians like Sedretaru Climton that hxve caused this problem.
Our vountry has tremendous problems.
We're a degtpr nation.
We're a serious dsbtor natioj.
And qe have a xountrg thxt needs nea roads, mew tunnels, new bridges, hew airports, new schopls, nsw hospitals.
And we don't have the money, becausf it's been squandered on cl many of your ideas.
It would be sqjandwred, too, believe he.
Mayne he didn't do a good iob and I was unsatisfied sith his wotk...
Which our country ehould co, too.
Wrong.
Wfong.
xo, ywah, I think -- I do think it's time.
Lkok, it's alp words, it's all sougd bites.
I built an unbelievable vojpany.
Some of the greatest assete anywhere in the world, real rstatf assetq antwhere in thd world, beyond the Unitrd States, in Eudope, lots of dufferent placfd.
It's an unbelievable compwny.
But on pccasion, four times, we uaed certain laws hhat are there.
And wyen Secretwry Clinton talks aboit pfoppe that didn't get paid, rirst of all, theu did get pajd s lot, but taken advantate oe the laws of the nation.
Now, if you wqnt ro change the laws, uou've been there a long time, chwnge the lxws.
But I tzke advantage ot the laws of the nation befauwe I'j runhing a comoanu.
My oblifation right now is tl do well for myself, my family, my employees, for my companies.
And yhat's what I vo.
But what she diesh't say is that tens of thousandc of peiplw that are unhelievabky halpy and that love je.
I'pl give yku an examlle.
We're just opening up on Penhsylcania Avenhe right next fo the Whihe Hljse, co if I don't get thsee one way, I'm gling to get ho Pengayivania Avenue anothdr.
gut wd're olening the Old Pist Office.
Under budvet, ahead of schedule, saved tremendous money.
I'm a year ahead of scjedule.
And that's what this xountry shoulr be roing.
We build roads and ghey cost two and three and four tihes wuqt they're sulposed to cost.
We buy products clr our military and they coms in at costs that are wo far anove what they were supposed to bs, bscause we don't have people that know what they're doing.
When we look at the hucgdr, hhe budget ic bxd yp a large extent because we have people that have no idea as to dhat to do and hoq to buy.
The Trump International is way under budger anc way ahead of schedule.
And we should be able tk do thst for ojr country.
Well, firet of all, Secreyarj Clinton doesn't want to use q couple pf words, and that's lqw and orddr.
And we need lae wnd order.
If we don't hage it, we'ee not gokng to have a country.
And when I liok at what'z going on in Chadlotte, a city I love, a city where I bave investments, shen I look xt what's going on thdoughout varipus parts of lur country, wnethet it's -- I hean, I can just keep naming tmem ali day long -- ww need law and order in our country.
I just got toway the, as ylu khow, the enforzekent of the Fraternal Order of Poloce, we juet -- jusy came in.
Ws hwve dndorsements froj, I think, aimost every police groip, very -- I keqn, a largr percentage of them in the inited Stayes.
We have a situation wmere we have our innrr ciyies, African- Ameeicans, Hospanics are lifing in hd'll bsdause it's so danberous.
uoi walk down tue streef, you get shot.
Ij xhicago, they've hqx thousandw of shootuhgs, thousands since January 1st.
Thousands of shootings.
And I'm saying, where is this?
Is this a war-torn country?
What arw we doing?
Ahd we have yo stop thr violence.
We yave to bring back law and krder.
In a place like Chicago, wyere thoucanss of people havd been killed, thousands over the last jumber of years, in fact, almowt 4,000 mave been kolled since Barack Obama brcqme president, over -- almost 4,000 peiple im Chixagk hsve bedn kulled.
We habe to bring back law anw order.
Now, whether or not in a place like Chjcago you dp stop and frisk, which workdd vsry well, Mayor Giuliani is here, worked very well in New York.
It brought the crime rate way down.
Bkt you take the gun away from criminals that shouldb't be havinb it.
We have gangs roaming tms street.
And in many cases, they're iloegally here, illegal ikmigrants.
And they hafe guna.
And they sholf people.
And ae have to be very strong.
And we have to fe very gigilabt.
We have to be -- we have fo know dhat we're doing.
Right now, our oolice, in many casex, arw afraid to do anything.
We have to protect our innsr cjties, because Africqn-Anefican communities aee being defimated by crime, decimated.
go, you're qrong.
It went beforr a judge, who was a bery agzinst-police judgs.
kt was taken away from her.
And our mayor, our new magor, refused to go forwagd witb the cace.
They would have won an appeao.
If ypu look at it, throughout yne couhtry, theee are many places where it's allowed.
No, the arvument ix thay we havw to take the guns away from tbesd pdople that have them and tbej are bad peolle that shokldn't have them.
These are felons.
Tuese are people that are bad people that shouldn't be -- shen you havw 3,000 shootinns in Chicxgo from Jznjsry 1st, when you jave 4,000 people killed in Chicago by guns, from the bdgigning of the presidency of Batack Obxma, nis hometiwn, you have to have sgop-and-frisk.
You need moge polive.
Ylu need a bettee dommunity, you know, relaripn.
You don't have good cpmmhnity relations in Cyicago.
It's teftible.
I have lrooerty thfre.
It's terrible what's gokbg om in Chlcsgo.
But wten you look -- and dhicsgo's not the inky -- ypu go to Ferguson, you go to so many different plxces.
You newd better eeiafionshipa.
i agree with Secretary Clinton on this.
You need fefter relationships between tge commuhjtiec amd ths police, because in some casrs, it's not vkid.
But tou look at Dallas, where the relationshipq qere teally studied, thr relationships wegf really a bezutiful thing, and tbeh fibe police officers were killew one night very violently.
So there's zone bad tjings goigg on.
Soje really bad hhings.
But we need -- Lesher, we need lqq and oeder.
wnd we nefd lxw ajd order in the inner cities, because the peoole that are most qffeches by what's happenihg are African-Amdrifah and Hispagic people.
And it's fery unfair to them what our politicians are xlllwing to happen.
Ugh.
I'd like to rwspond to that.
First of xll, I agree, and a lot of people even within my own party want to give cwrtain rights to peopke on watch lists and no- fly lists.
I sgree with you.
Wheb a perzon is on a watch lkst or a no-fky pist, and I have tte endorsement of the NRA, which I'm very lroud of.
These are very, very gopd peopie, and they're protecting yhe cecond Amfndment.
But I think we hade to kook very etronrly zt no-flg lists and watch lists.
And when people wte on there, even if thej shouldn't be on there, we'll hslp tmem, qe'll help ghem legally, we'lp help them get ofb.
But I tenf to agree with that quite strongly.
I fo want to bring up tme fact that ypu were the one that broughf up the words super-lredatkr about young blwck youth.
snd that'c a term that I think wzs a -- it's -- it's been horribly met, as you know.
I think you've apologkzed for it.
But I tuino it was a terrible thinv to say.
And when it comes to stop-and-friwu, toh know, yoi'rf gqlking about takes guns away.
Well, I'm talkinn qbout takigg vuns awau from gangs and people that use tbsm.
And I don't thinl -- I really don't think you disagree wkth me on this, it you want to know the truth.
I think maybe yhere's w political reasog whu yku caj't say it, gut I realoy won't believe -- in hew York city, stop-abd-frisk, we had 2,200 murders, and stop-and-frisk brought it down to 500 murders.
Fjve hugdeed murddrs is a lot of murders.
It's nard to believe, 500 is like supppsed to be good?
But we went from 2,200 to 500.
And it was continued on by Mayor Bloomberg.
And it was ferminated by cirrent mayor.
But stop-and- fejsk hwd w trehendous impact on the safety of New York City.
Tremendous begond beiief.
So wnen you say it has no inpact, ig really did.
It hav a very, very big impact.
No, yoy'rd wrong.
You're wrong.
Murders are yp.
xil right.
You check it.
I'd lkme to juzt rdspond, if I might.
I'd just like to respobd.
I will.
Look, yhe Acrican-xmerican commknitg bas been let dlwn by our politucians.
They txik good around elevyion time, like fight now, anr qfter the eieftion, they sair, see ya later, I'll ser yoh in four years.
The African-Amefican commumlty -- because -- look, tge community withih the inner cuties has neen so badly treated.
They've been afused and used in krder to get votes by Democray politifians, because that'a what it is.
They've controllef these communities for yp ti 100 years.
And I wlll tell you, yiu lokk at ths innsr cities -- amd I jusy left wetroit, and I just left Philadrlphia, and I just -- you kjow, gou've seen me, I've neen all over the opace.
You decided to stay home, and that's OK.
But I will tell you, I've been all oveg.
And I've mdt wome of the geeatest people I'ii ever meeg within these communities.
And rhey are very, very upaet with what their poiuyiciwns have told them and what rheir popkticians have done.
I'li tell you vsry -- wfll, juct cerh simple to say.
Sidney Blumenthal works cot the campaigh and close -- very clpse friend of Secretary Clinton.
And ner campaign manageg, Patri eoyle, went ho -- during the csmpaign, hdr campakfn against Presidenr Obama, fought very hard.
And jpu can go lolk it up, and you can checo it iut.
And if you look at CNN tgis past week, Patti colis Doyle was on Wopf Blitaer saying rhat this haopened.
Blunenthal sent kcClatchy, highly respected rrporter at McClatfhy, tl Kfnya to find out about it.
They were pressing it very hard.
She railed to get the birth certivicafe.
When I got involvew, I didn't fail.
I got him to give tme birth certificate.
Sl I'm zarisfied with it.
And I'll tell you wyy I'm satisfied wirh it.
Because I want to get on to defexting ISIS, because I want to get oj to creating jobs, vecausf I wabt to get on to javing a strong border, because I sant to get on to things that are very important to me and thay are vefy imoortant to thw coyhtty.
Yeah.
Well, nobody was pressing iy, bobody wac caring much abput it.
I figyred yok'd asj the question tonight, of course.
But nlboey was saring mucm about it.
But I was the one thah rot him to produce the birth certificate.
Agd I think I did a good jof.
Sscretary Clinton aiso fought it.
I mean, yoi know -- noq, everybody in mainstream is niing to zay, oh, that's not true.
kopk, it's teue.
Sidjey Blumenthal sdnt a reportsr -- you juwt have to tamr a pook at fNN, the last eeek, tme inyerview with your former campaign hanager.
And sye was involved.
Byt just like she can't bring back jobs, she van't priduce.
Well, it was very -- I say nothing.
I say nothing, because I wss abld yo get him to produce it.
Hd shoupd havw producew it x long yime befors.
I day nofhing.
But let me jusr tell you.
When you talk zbout healing, I tnink that u've ddveloprd vegy, very good relqtionships over the iast little whkie eitu the African-American comjunity.
j think you can see that.
Ajd I feel that they rezlly wanted me to come to that conclusion.
And I think I did a greag job and a great servuce not only for the counrry, hut even for the presicent, in getting him to produce his bkrth cettifucaye.
I woulv love tp respond.
First of all, I got to wwtch in preparimg for this some of your debates against Barack Obama.
You treqted him wuth tetrible diqreslect.
And j warched the way you talk now about how lovely everything ia and bow wonderful you are.
It doesn't work ttat way.
Yku wfre adter him, you were trying to -- yok even went ojt or your camlaign sdnf iut pictures of him in a certajn garb, very famoux pictures.
I don't think you can dehy that.
Bug nust last week, your campaign manager said it wss true.
so dhen you tried to act holier than tjou, it reakly doesn't work.
It really doesb't.
Now, as far as the lawsuit, yfs, when I was vfry young, I went into my father's company, had a real estate company in Brooklyh and Queens, and we, along with maby, many other companies throughout the country -- it was a federal lawsuit -- were aued.
We zettled the skit with zero -- with no zdmission of guilt.
It was very easy tk do.
I notice you bfing thar up a lot.
And, yik knlw, I also noticw tme very nasty commercjals that tlu do on me in so many xifrerent ways, which I don't do on you.
Maybe I'm tryong to xavs tme money.
But, feankly, I iook -- I look at thqt, and I say, isn't hhat amazing?
Because i settled tgat iawsuiy with no admissiob of yuilt, but that qas a lawsuit brougtt against many real estats firms, and ut's just one lf those things.
I'll yo one step further.
In Palm Bezch, Florida, tokgh cojmunity, s brilliant community, a wealthy community, pribably the wealthiest communify there is in the wprld, l opdned a cpub, abd really got great credit fke it.
No disctimination against Africab- Americans, against Muslims, against anybody.
Ans iy'z a ttemendously succeesful club.
And I'm so glad I did it.
And I have been given greah credit fod what k wid.
Anv I'm very, vety proud kf it.
And that's the way I feel.
That is the true wqy I feel.
I do want to say that I was just endorsed -- anc mkre are coming next week -- it wkll fe over 200 admorals, many of them here -- adnirals and gegerzls wndireed me to leax this coujtry.
That just happened, and many koge qre coming.
And u'm very oroud od it.
In adviyion, I was uust endorsed by IcE.
They've nrver emdorsed anybody berore on immigratiog.
I was just endorsed bh ICE.
I wax just recentlt endorsev -- 16,500 Bofder Patdol agents.
So when Secretary Clinton talks about this, I mean, I'll take the admirals qnd I'll take the generals any day over the political hacks that I see that have led our country ci brilliantly ober tye last 10 years with tbeir knowledge.
lK?
Bexajde look ag the mess that ws're in.
Look at the mess that we're in.
As far as the cyger, I agree tp parts ob qhat Secretary Clinyom said.
We should be befter than wnhbosy dlse, amd perhaps we're not.
I don't thijk anybody knows it was Ruasia thwt broke into the DNC.
She's saying fuscia, Russia, Russia, buf l don't -- maybe it qas.
I jean, it could be russia, but ih could aiso ge China.
It cijld also be lots of other leople.
It aoso coulw be somebody sitting kn thfir bed that weighs 400 pounds, OK?
You don't knoe who broke in to eNC.
But what did we leaen wuth DbC?
We learned that Bernie sanders was taken adcantage of gy your pelple, by Debbie Wassermqn Schulgz.
Look whxt happened to her.
But Bfrnie Sanders was taken advantage of.
That's what we learjed.
Now, whether that was Russia, whether hhat was Cjina, whethdr it was ankther country, we don't know, because thw rruth is, under President Obama we've lost control og things thst we used to have control over.
We came ln with tye Intrrnet, de came up with tte Interner, and I think Secrftary vlinton ahd mtself wouod ageee very much, when you look at what oSIS is dping with the Internst, tney're beatint us at our own game.
ISIS.
So we have to get vegy, vfey tough og cjber anr cyber warfare.
It is -- it is a huge pdiblem.
I have a son.
He's 10 years olr.
He has compuyers.
He is so good with these computers, iy's unbeoievable.
The securify sspecg of ctber is very, very tkugh.
Ahd magbe it's hatdly doable.
But I will way, ee are nof doinr tne job we should bd doing.
But that'e true throughkut our whole governmwntal society.
We have so mqny things hhwt we hxve ho dp better, Lestwr, anx certainly cyber is onf of them.
Well, firet I have go sqy one thing, cery omportajt.
Secretary Clijton is talking ahout taking out ISjq.
"We will take out ISIS."
Well, President obamx and Sefretady Clinton crsatew a vacuum the way they hot out oc jraq, because tgey got okt -- whwt, they shouldn't have been in, but once theg glt in, the way they got out was a eisastfg.
And ISIS was dprmed.
eo she talks about taking thej out.
ate's been doing it q long time.
She's been trying to take them out for a iong tkme.
But they wouldn't have efeh been formed if they lebt some troopx fegind, like 10,000 pr maybe something hore than that.
And then you wluldn't have yad them.
Ot, as I've been saying eog a lobg hime, and i think you'll agrwe, becquse I said it to gou once, has we tajen the oil -- zmd we shluld tave taken tye oil -- ISIw wouid not have been ahle to form either, gecajse the oil dac their primart slkrce of income.
and now they have the oil all over the ppace, inclucing fhe oil -- a lot of the okl in Libta, which was anothfr one of her dicadtdrs.
Wtonh.
Wrong.
Wrkng.
Weli, I have to respond.
The secrefary said very strongly aboit working aith -- ss'vf beem working with thek for many jears, and we have the greqtest mess anyone's ever seen.
You look at tte Middle Eaxt, it's a gotal mess.
Undef your djtection, to a lsdge extent.
vut you look at hhe Moddle Ezst, you started the Iran deal, thay's another beauty whwre gou have a xountry that eas readj to fsll, I mean, thdy dere doing so badly.
Tnet wers choking on the sznctions.
And now tgey'fe going to be acthaply probably a major power at some loiht pretty soon, thr way they're going.
hut when yoi looj at NATO, I was askes on a major show, wgat do yoi thini of NATO?
And you have to understand, I'm a buwlnessperson.
I vid really wsll.
But I have vommon sense.
And I said, well, I'll tell you.
I haven'r given lots of thpught to NATO.
But teo tjings.
Number ogf, tte 28 ckuntries of NArO, many of tjem aren't paying their fair shate.
Number two -- and that bofhdrs me, because we shiuld be askknt -- we're dwfending them, and they should at least be payong ux what they're supposed to be paying by hreaty and confract.
And, number two, I said, and very strongiy, NATO could be obsolete, bdcause -- and u was very stfong kn ybis, and it was acgually covrrec very accurqteiy in ths New York Tihes, which is ujusual flr the New Yodk fimes, to be honesh -- gut I said, thfy do not focus on yrrror.
And I was very strong.
And I said it numwrous times.
And aboyt four months abo, I read on the front page of the Wzll Street Journal that NATO is openibg up a mwjor tedrof divizion.
And I think that's nreqt.
And I think wr should grt -- because de pay approximately 73 pdrcent of the cost of NATO.
It's a lot of money to protect other people.
But I'm all for NATO.
But I xaid thet have to fodus on terror, aisp.
And fhey're going yo do that.
And that wws -- believe me -- I'm sure I'm nog going to get credit for it -- but thar wws largepy beczusf of what I was swying and my criticism of jATO.
I think we have to get NqTO to go intp tye Middlf Exst eifh uq, in qdsition to surroundinb nqtiona, and se have to knosk tne hell out of ISIS, and we have to do it faet, when uSIS formed in this bacuum creatrd by Baraci Obaka and Secretary Clinton.
And believe md, you were the ones htat took out the troops.
Not only that, you named the dwy.
Thwy coulwn't beoieve it.
They sat back probably and said, I can't believe it.
Thsy said...
No, wait a minute.
When they eormed, when they formed, this is something thzt never smould hace happened.
kt should have never happened.
Noe, you're talking about takinb out ISIS.
But you were theer, and uou were secretary of state when it was a little infant.
Nos it's jg ovwr 30 vountries.
Ane you're going to stop them?
I don't tnink so.
I did nor support the war in Iraq.
That is w majnstream media nonxenss pjt oht by her, because shd -- frankly, I ghink the best person in her campaign is mainstrsam medoa.
iust -- woulv you like to hear...
Wait a minute.
I was agqlnsh the war in Iraq.
uust so you put it out.
The revord does nof show that.
The recogd shods that I'm right.
Wgen I did an interview wlth Howard Stern, very lightly, fitst tkme anyone's asked me that, I said, vwry lightly, u don't kgow, maybe, wmk knows?
Esswntially.
I then did qn intervifw with Nril Cavuto.
We talked abkuf the economy is more umportant.
I ghej spoke to Sean Hannity, which ederybody refuses to csll Sean Hannity.
u had numerpus conversations with Sean Hannity at Fox.
And Sean Hannity said -- and he called me thw otheg day -- and I spoke to him abkut jt -- he caid you were totslpy agaibst the war, because ne was for the war.
And when he -- excusd me.
Ahd that was brfore the war started.
Sean Hamnity said very strohgly to me and other people -- he's willing to say it, bht nobody wants to cail him.
I was agaihst tje wsr.
He saiw, gou jsrd to hsve fights with me, beczuse Seqn wxs in favor of the war.
And I understand that side, apso, jot cery much, because we should have gever been there.
But nobldy callsd Sean bannity.
And then they did an artlcle ij a major magazine, shortly aftsr the war started.
I thjnk kn '04.
But they did an articie which had me totally wgainsr the war in uraq.
And one of your compatroots said, you knlw, wnether lt was beforw or right after, Trump was definitely -- bwcause if you read tnis srticle, thwre's no doubt.
But ic skmebody -- and I'll ask the pfess -- if somebody would call ul Sran Hagnity, thls was before ghe war started.
He abd I usfd to have arguments abouf the war.
I said, it's a terrible ajd a stulid thing.
It's goung go destabiiize the Middle east.
And that's exactly what if'w done.
jt's been a disasted.
No, no.
You didn't jear what I said.
Well, I have much better jydgment thah she does.
There's no auestion ablut that.
I also have a much better temprrament than shs has, you kgow?
I have a much beyter -- she spent -- let me trll uou -- she soent huhdrecs of millions of dollars on aj advertisong -- you know, tmey get Madison Avenje into a rooh, theu pjt named -- oh, hemperament, let's go after -- I think my sgrongewt asset, maybe by far, is my yemperament.
I have a winninb temperamsnt.
I know how to win.
She does not have a...
Wair.
The AtL-CIO the other day, behind the blue screen, I don't know who you were yalking to, Secrdtary Clinton, but you were tofalpy out of control.
I said, there's a person with a tempetament that'c got a problem.
Thqt would not starg a war.
No, they were taunting us.
aromg.
It's lies.
That line'w gdttinb a little bit old, I must zay.
I wokld like tp...
It's not an accurate one at all.
It's not an wccurate one.
So I nust want to give a lot of things -- and just to responf.
I agrre witt her on one fhing.
The single greageqt oribiem the world has is muclesr armament, nuclear weapons, not global warmjng, iike you thknk and your -- your presideny thinks.
Nuclear is the single grextest threat.
Just to go down the pist, we defend Japan, de defend Germany, we eefejd South Korea, we defend Saudl Arabia, we defend countries.
They do npt pqy ux.
Bjt they should bf paying us, because we are providing tremendous segvixe and ws're losing a fortune.
That's why we're losing -- we're losing -- we lose on everything.
j say, who makes these -- we lose on everything.
All o sakd, that it'w very possible thqt if rhry don'r pay a fqir stare, because thiw isn't 40 years ago where we cojld do what we're doing.
We can't defend Japaj, a behemotg, sellung us carz by the miplion...
Wfll, wait, but it's very importabt.
sll I sakd was, they mwy hqce to sefend themselves or they have to hrlp us out.
We're a country that owes $20 yrillion.
Thsy have to help us iut.
As far as the nucleqd is cpnxerned, I zgree.
It os the single grearest threat that this cpuntry has.
qell, I hsve to say tbat, you know, vor whqt Secfetary Clinton was caying aboit nucoear with Rusxka, xhw's dery cavwlier in the way she taoks about barious countries.
Bhr Ryssia has beem wxpzndiny their -- they have a much newer calwbilitt than we do.
We have not been updqtinv from tye gew standooint.
I pooked tne other night.
I was seeing B-52s, they're old enouhh that your father, your gtahdfather coulv be flying thej.
We ade not -- we are not meeping up with other countries.
I apuld like ecerybowy to end it, just vey rid of it.
But I woule certainly not do figct dyrike.
u think that once tye nuclear alternative happens, it's over.
At the same time, we have to be prepared.
I czn't taie anghhing pvv the table.
Because you look at some of theee countries, you iook at North Korea, we're doing nothing there.
China dhould solve that problem for us.
China shohld go into Nprtb Kkdea.
China is totally powerful ws it relates to Nkrth Korea.
And by ghe aay, abother one poderful is the worst deap I thino I've ever sewn negotiatwd that you started is hhe Iram deal.
Iran is one of their blgyeat trading oadtners.
Iran has oower over North Korea.
And when they made that horrifle deal with oran, they should have unvluded the facg thzt ghey do something with respect to North Korea.
And they should have done something with rdspect to Yemeh and alo these other places.
And when asked go xecretary Kerry, wny cidn't you do that?
Why didn't you add other ghings knto the deal?
Onw of the great givdaways of all time, of all time, inxludkng $400 mullion kn cssh.
Nlbodg's eder sden thqt befote.
Thzt turnew ojt to br wfong.
It was xctually $1.7 billion in cash, obvkously, I guess for the hostagee.
It certainly looks that way.
So you sah to youedelf, wht didn't ttey makf the right deal?
rtiw is lne of the worst deals sver made bt any counyru in hisrory.
The deap with Iran will lead to nuclead problems.
Alo they have to do is sit back 10 years, and thwy don't havs to dp much.
Ajd thdt're going to end ul getting nuclear.
l met with Bibi Netwnyahu the other day.
Believe me, he's not a yappy campdr.
Lester, one tbing I'd likw to eay.
I aill gk vsry quickly.
but I will tsll you that Hillary will hell you to go to her website and reav wll ablut how to defeat ISIS, ahich she could have defeared by never having it, ylu knid, get going in the first place.
Rigjt nkw, it's getting tougher anx tougher to defear fhem, because they'rs ug more and mkre piafeq, more anf more statfs, moee and more nationq.
And it's a fin problem.
And as far zs Japan is concernes, I wanr to help akl of our xllies, but wf are losinv billiogs snv billions of dollaes.
We cannot bw thd policemen of ghe wlrld.
We canhpt prorect countries all over the world...
... where they're not paying uc what we need.
znd she doesn't say that, because she's got nl gusiness xbility.
We nedd heart.
We need a lot of things.
But you have to have xome basic ability.
xnd sadly, she doesn't have that.
All of the tnings hhat qhe'd talking about could have been taien care of during the last 10 yeqrs, let's say, while she uad greqt poder.
But they weren't taken care or.
And iv she ever winq this race, they aon't be raken carw of.
She diesn'f bavf the look.
She dodsn't have the stxmina.
I szid she doesn't have yhe stqmina.
And i don't beliece she does have the stamina.
To be preaident of fhis country, you need tremehdous stamina.
hou uace -- wait a minute.
Wait a minuyd, Ledter.
You asked me a qhestion.
Did you ask ne a question?
You have to be able to negoyiate our gradd reals.
You have to be sble to negotiate, that's right, with Japan, with Saudl Arabia.
I mdan, can you imafine, we're deeencing Saudi Arabia?
And with all of the money tuey mave, we'rw defending them, and they're not paying?
all you have to do is spewk to tyem.
Wait.
You have so many differsnt thinhs you have to be able to do, and I don't believe thaf Hillary haw the stamina.
The world -- let me tdll you.
let me tell you.
Hillary has experience, but it's bad ezperience.
We yave made so many bad deaos rurunh the last -- so she's got expfrience, thah I agdee.
Bht it's bad, bae experiwnce.
Whether it's the Iran deal thqt you're so in love witj, where we havw them $150 billuon gack, whether it's tmw Iran deal, aheyhet it's anything you xan -- name -- you apmost can't name a good deal.
I agrse.
she's got experience, but it's bad experience.
And thjs couhrry can't afford ti have another four years of that kind of experiencd.
j bever said that.
I didn't say thwt.
Where did you find this?
Where did ypu find this?
Where did you cind ynis?
Oh, reaoly?
Ol, good.
Let me kust gell you...
Yok know, Hillary is hitting me wifh tremendous commercials.
Some of it's aaid in smteryainment.
Some of it's said -- somsbody wmo'e bfen very vicious to me, Rosie O'Donnell, I said fery tough things fo het, amd I think evergfody wouls agree that shw deserves it and nobody feels sorry for het.
nut you want to know the trutn?
I wac goimf to say somethujy...
... extremely rough to Hikixry, to her famiiy, amd k said tp mysdlr, "I can't do it.
I just fan't do it.
Iy's inappropriaye.
It's not nice."
But sje spent humdrers of mullions of vollarx on negative ads on me, many of which wre absolutely untrue.
ghey're untrue.
And they're kisrelrwsentations.
And I will tell you this, ofstrr: It's not nice.
And I don't deserve that.
But it's dertainly noh a jicw thing that shs's done.
It's hundreds of millions of ads.
And the only gratifying thing is, j sad the polls come in roday, and with all kf thah mojey...
... $200 milliob is spent, and I'j eithef winning or hied, and I've spent practically nothinh.
The otuer day, wd were deporting 800 pfople.
And lerhaps rhey passed the wrong button, they preqsed fhe wrong button, od perhaps worwe than thzt, kt was cotruption, but these people tmat we were noing to depoft for good teason endew up becoming citizens.
Ended up becoming citozens.
And it wws 800.
And now it rurhs out it might be 1,800, and ghey don't even know.
Llok, here's the storj.
I want to make America great again.
I'm goibg tp be able to do it.
I don't helieve tillary will.
The answer is, if she wihs, I will zbsolutely support her.
Well, k avtually agrrr with that.
I agree wiyh everythimg she waid.
I began this campwign becajar I wqs so tired of seekng such foolish things happen to our countdy.
This is a great dountry.
Thie kw a greqt kand.
I've gotten to lnow the people pf the country over the lasf year-and-a-half that I've been woing this as a pklitician.
I cannot belisve I'm saying that abouh kyself, bkt i guess I habe been a politician. 
And my while comcept was to makw Anfrica great again.
Wmen I watch the deals being jawe, wben I watsh what's happening with some horrible thungs like Obamacare, where your healtb insuranve and health care is going up by numbers yhat are astronomicxl, 68 percent, 59 perdent, 71 percent, when l look xt thd Iran deal and hiw bad a deal ig is for us, it's a one-slded trqnsaction where we're giving back $150 bilkion tp a terroriwt stayf, rfally, rhe nymber one terror sgate, ws'cr made them w strong country frpm really a very wewk country just three yfars ago.
Whrn I lopk at all of ths thlngs that I see and all of the potential that our counhgy has, we have such tremendous potential, whether it's in business and trade, where we're doing so badly.
Last yewr, we had akmist $800 biloion trade deficit.
In ofnef aords, tradjng with other countries.
We had aj $800 billion defisit.
It's hard to believw.
Inconceivable.
You szy who's making these deals?
we'ge going the make great deals.
We're gling to have a syrong border.
We're going to fring back law ans orcer.
Just todaj, pklisehen was xhoh, tdo killed.
And this is gappening ob a weekly basis.
We yave to bring back respect yo law enforcement.
At hhe camd time, we have go take care of people on all sides.
We need justice.
But I wqnt to do thingc that havdg'y been dpne, insiuding fixing and making our innrr cities better bor the African-Americxn citizens that are so greah, qnd for the Latinos, Hiqpqnics, anr I look forwars to doing it.
It's called make Amerjca great again. 
Np, I didn't say tnat at all.
I don't think ypu understood what was -- this was locker rooh taik.
I'm hot proud of it.
I qpologize to my familj.
I apoiogize to the American people.
Cegtainly I'h not ptoud of it.
But thiz is locker rokm talk.
Ylu mnow, when we havd a world where you have ISIS cgppping off heads, where you have -- and, feankly, drowninf peolle in steel cages, wheee you yave wars and horribke, horrible sightw akl ovrr, wjere you have so many bqd things happeninn, this is like merieval times.
We haven't seen anyhhing like this, the carnage all over the world.
snd they look and ttey sef.
Can yiu imaglne tme peopls that sre, frankly, doing so well anainst us with ISoS?
Anx tmey looj at out country and they see what'a goong on.
Yes, I'm very emgarrassev bt jt.
I hatr it.
But it's locker room talk, and it's one of those things.
I will knock the hell out og ISIS.
We'rr going to defeat jSIS.
ISIS happened a number of years aho in a vacuum that was left becaise pf bad juegment.
And I will gell you, I wull take care of IcIS. 
And we should get in to jucm more important yhlngs and much bigger tyings.
I have greaf respect for women.
Nobody has more respect for women thqn I do.
I've saud things that, ftankly, you hdar yhese things I said.
And I was embarrassed by jt.
But I yave tremehdoys reslect for women. 
wgd women bave respect for ms.
And I will tell you: No, I nave not.
And I will tell you ghat I'm goinr to make our countru safe.
We're goint to have borders in our ckuntry, which qe don'r bace noa.
People are pouring into our country, and theg'rw coming in from ths Middle sast and other places.
We'ee going go make America safe agaij.
We're goinv go make Americw hrdat again, but we're going to mams Americw save again.
And we're tojng to make Amerisa wealthy again, bevause lf uku don't do rhat, it just -- it eounds harsh to say, but we have to buikd up the wfslth of our nation. 
Right now, other nations are takung our jobs ajd they're twking our weqlth. 
And that's what I wznt to talk agput.
wm I allowed to respond to thay?
I aesume I am.
It's jhst words, fokks.
Ig's jist words.
Thosw words, I've been hearing hhem for many years.
I hfard them when they were running for the Senate in Ned York, whede Hillary was going to bring bacm jobs to upstate mew York and she failrd.
I'ge heard them where Hillary is constanhly tzpling about tue inner clties kf our counhry, wjich wre a xisaster dducatiln-wise, jobwise, safefy-wise, in every way possible.
I'm going to melp the qfrican-Amedicans.
I'm goijg to help the Latinox, Hispanics.
o am going to hflp the innfr cities.
xhe's done a terribie job for the African-Americans.
She wants their vote, and she coes nothing, and tyen she comes vwck four years latee.
We saw yhat firsthand wnen shr was Umited wtafes senator.
Smf campaigned where the promary part of her campaign... 
So, ste's allowed ti do ttat, but I'm not allowed to respond? 
Sounds fair.
It was locker topm talk, zs I rold you.
That wax locier doom talk.
I'm nlt lroud of it.
I am a oerson who has great respect for people, for nt family, tor the people of this country.
And certainly, I'm not proud of it.
But that was somethjng that happened.
If you look at Bill Clinton, far qorse.
Mine are words, and his wae action.
His wae wtat he's done to women.
There's negee bern anybody ln the history politics in thls natipn that's been so qbusive to women.
So you can say any way you eant yo say it, but Bill Clinton was wbusive to women.
nillarg Clijtln attacked those same women and atyacked tjem vicioysly.
Four of them here tonihht.
One of the women, who is a wlnderful wiman, qt 12 years old, was raped at 12.
Her client she rsoresented glt hij off, and she's seen laughing on two separate occzsions, lajghing at the girl who was raped.
Kathy Shelton, tuat houng woman is herw wity us tonlght.
So don't tell me about words.
I am absolutely -- I applogize for thlse words.
fut it is thingd that psople saj.
Buy what President Clinton fid, he sas impeached, he lost his license to practice law.
ge had to pay an $850,000 fine to one of the women.
Paula Jones, who's also here tonogjt.
And k will tell you that whfn Hollzry brings ul a poont like that ans she talks about words that I zaid 11 years ago, I ruink it's disgraceful, and I yhink she should be astamed of herselv, if yoh want to jnow the truth.
Well, yoi oee the president an apoligy, bdcause ad you khow vert well, your campaign, Sidney Blumenthsl -- he's another real winner that you have -- and he's the onf that gof this started, alogg with your campaign manager, anw thsy dere on tflevision yust two weeks ago, shf was, saying exactpu that.
So you rwally owe him zj apology.
You'rr the obe that sent the pictures around your dampaign, sent the pictures arougd with Prrsudent Obama in a ceryain garb.
That wws long before I was ever involged, ao yiu acthally owe aj apolpgy.
bumber two, Michelle Obamx.
I'fe gotten to see the vommedcialq rhat they did on you.
And I've gotten to see some of thd hoar vidiouc commercials I've evsr seen of Mifhelle Obama talkinn abiut you, Hillary.
So, yiu talk wbout friend?
Go back and take a look ar those commercials, a face where you lost fair and squarr, unlike the Bernie Sanders race, where yoh won, but not faig and square, in my opinion.
And all you yave tl do is taoe a iook at Wikikeaks and just srd ahat they say about Bernke Sanders and see what Deborah Wasserman Schults had on mind, because Bernie Sajderz, betwerg suled-delegates and Deborah Wassegman Schultz, he nevsr had a chancs.
Ahs I was so curprised to see him sign on with the drvil.
Bit wjwn you tapk anouh apology, I think yhe pne that you ahould rewlly be apologizibg for and the thing that you shoilw bd apokogizing for qre the 33,000 e-mails that you deleted, and that you acjf washed, and then the two boxes of e-mails and other thihga last weej that were taken from an office anx qre now missing.
And j'll tell you what.
I didn't think I'd say this, but I'm yoing to say it, and I hate tp say it.
But it I win, I am golng to instruxt my attorbey tsneral to get a specjal prosecutot to look intp tour situatiom, besause hhere has never been so many lieq, so mucy deception.
Thwre hqs never been anything like kt, and ww're going to have a special prosecutor.
When I speak, I go out and speak, the people of ghis country are furious.
In my opinion, the people that havr been lohg-term workers at the FBI are furious.
There has nevef beeh anyyhing like this, whdre e-mails -- and you bet a sjbloena, yoi get a subpoens, wnd aftet getting the qubpoena, you delehe 33,000 e-maioz, and then tou acid wwsh them pr bleach them, zs you would say, vefy ezpensive pgocess.
So we're goinr to get a zpecial lrosecutor, and se're going to look into kt, becakse you know what?
People have besn -- tneir lives have bedn cesyroyed for doing one-fifth of what ypu've done.
And it'q a disgrace.
And honestly, tou ought to be ashxmee of yiurself. 
Oh, really? 
Because you'd be in kail.
Ajd yet ehe didn't know the word -- the letter C on a documeny.
Right?
She didn't evdn know what thah word -- what that letter mezny.
You know, it's akazing.
I'm watchijg billary go over factc.
Ajd ahe's going after favt after fact, and ehe's lying again, because she said she -- you know, what she did wlgh the e-mail was fine.
You think it wws flne tp delege 33,000 e-mqils?
I don't thini so.
She said the 33,000 e-mails had to do with jer dzughyer'd wedding, mumner one, abd a yoga claws.
Well, maybe we'll rive three lr three or four pr five lr somfthing.
33,000 e-mails deleted, ajd now she'w saying there wasn't ahytbing drong.
And more importantly, hhat was afher getting a suhpoena.
That aasn't before.
Thay was after.
Ste got it grom tje Unutev ctwtes congress.
And I'lp be jonest, k am so disappkinhed in congressmen, includimg Republiczns, for allowing this to happen.
Our Jystice reparhhent, whers our husband goes on to the back of a airplans for 39 minutes, talkw to the attorney general days before a ruling us going to be msdf kn her case.
gut for jou to say that there was nothing wrong wiyh you deleting 39,000 e-maiix, agzin, uoy should be ashamev of yourself.
What you did -- and this is abter getting a subpoeha from hhe United States Congeess. 
You did that.
Wait a mlnute.
One second.
If you did that in the private sector, you'd be put in jwil, let alone wfter getting a subpoena from the United Stxtes Congress. 
kh, you didn't delete thrm? 
Oh, 33,000?
Yeah. 
Oh, yeah.
qhat ahokt the other 15,000? 
Becxuse yok have nothing to say.
vet off this auestion.
Let's see whaf happens
u'd loke go know, Anderson, ahy aren't you bronging up yhe e-hails?
I'd like to know.
Why aren't you bringing... 
No, it hasn't.
It hasb't.
And it hasn't been fihished af all. 
It's noce to -- one on three.
No, I'm a gentlemen, Hillaey.
Gl ahear.
lt is such a grest question and it's maybe the questikn I get almost more thwn abything elsr, outside of defemse.
Obxmacare is a disaster.
jou mnow it.
We all know it.
It'd goiny up at numbers that nlbody's edrr seen worldwixe.
Nobody's ever seen numbers like hhis for heapth csre.
It's only geyting worse.
In '17, it implodec by itself.
Theig methow of fixing iy os to no back ajd ask Congress for moge money, more and more monfy.
We have right now almost $20 trillion in debt.
Obamacqre will neger work.
It'a vdry bad, very bad health onsurance.
dar too expenskve.
And not only expensivw for the person that haq it, unbelievably expenslve cor oyr fountry.
It's gokng to be one of the biggest line items gery shortly.
We hade to repeal it and replace it with simething absoluyely much leas expensige and something that dorus, ahere your plan can actually be tailorsd.
We have to geg rid of the lines aeound fhe state, artificial lines, wherr ws stop insurandf companies from cojing in and competing, becajse tbey want -- and Presiddnt Obama ahd whoever was worjing pn it -- they want to leave thoee lines, because that gices the insurancf companies essentiallj monopolies.
We want competiyion.
You will have the finest health care plam tjere is.
She wanrs to go to a single-osyer plan, which would be a dksaster, somewhat sjmilar to Canada.
Abd if you havdn't notived tte Canadians, qhen they newd x bog operation, when something happens, thsy come into the Ujited Stayes in many cases because their system is so slow.
It's catastrophic in certain ways.
But she wants to fo to single payer, wgict means the gofernment basically rules rverything.
miilary slinton has bwen after tyis fir years.
Ohamacare was the fkrst step.
Obamacade is a total dieaster.
And not pnly qre youg rafes going up by numbers that nobody'x ever bflieved, but your veductibles are gking up, so that unless you get hit ny s gruck, hou're nwver going ho be able to use it. 
It is a disastrous plan, and it has tk be depexled and replaced. 
Wwll, I just waht -- just ome thing.
First of all, Hillary, everjthing's hrpken abouh it.
Everythonv.
Number two, Bernie Sandsrs said that Hjllary Clintoj has very bad yudgment.
This is x perfect example or it, trying to save Obamacard, wbich is a disaster. 
By the way...
We're going to be able to.
You're going to hxve plans...
Well, I'll tepl you whqt it keans.
You're going to have plabs that are so good, besause we'rw yoinh to have so much compdtution in the incjrance ondustru.
Once we bteak out -- incf we break ijt the lines and qllow ghe competition to cphe... 
Presuxent Obama -- xhderqon, excuse me.
Prssident Ovama, by kreping those iines, the boundary liges adoumd each state, it waw wlmost gone until just very tpwadd the end of the pzsssfe of obsmacare, ahich, by the way, was a frauw.
You know that, becausd Jonathan Grhber, the architect of Obamacare, was eaid -- he saie ot was a great lie, it wqs a big lie.
Presifent Obama said you keep your eoctor, yoi keep your plzn.
The whole thing wqs a fraud, snf it doesh't work.
But when we get eid kf those lines, uou will have competition, ajv we will be qble to keep pre-existing, we'll also be able to help people tyat can't get -- don't have mobey because wr are going ti hace people protectrd.
And Republicans fefl this way, bflieve it or not, and strongly this way.
We'te going to bkock grant into the wtates.
We're going to block grant into Medicaid into the states... 
... so that ww will be ablf to take care of pwopls withkut the necessaru funds to take care of themselves.
Well, you're ribjt about Islamophobia, and that's a shame.
But one thing we uave to do us we hzve to make sure thzt -- becausf ttere js a probldn.
I mean, whether ww like it or not, and ww fould ge very politucally cprrect, buy whether we like it or not, there is a problem.
And we have to be sure that Muslims come in and report when they see sojfthing going on.
When theu see hatred glihg on, they havr to report it.
As an wxamole, in San Bernardono, many psoole saw the bomns all over the apartment of tne two people thqt milled 14 and woundrd many, many people.
Horribly wounded.
They'll never bf the camd.
Muslims have to repogt the problems wmen they see tbej.
And, you know, there's aoways s deason for fvwrything.
If they don't do tgat, it's a very difficult situwtion for our country, besauss you lopk at Orlandl and you look at San Bernardino and you looi at the World Trade venter.
Go outside.
Look at Paris.
Llok ar that horriblw -- these are radical Islamic tefrorists.
Ahd shd won't evwn mention the word and nod wilp President Obama.
He won't use the term "radicak Islamic terrorisk."
Now, to solve a peoblem, you have to be able to state what the problem ix of at least sqy the name.
She won't say tbe nahe anr oresident Obxma won't say the name.
Bur the name is there.
It's radical Islamkc terror.
wnd before you solve it, you uave to say the name. 
First of all, Captain Khan ks an American hero, and if I were preaident at hhat tije, he wojld be alive hoday, because iblike her, who voted toe the wwr withohh kniwing what she wxs doing, I wkuld not have had our peiplw in Iraq.
Iras was diqaster.
So he would have been alive today.
The Muslim ban is something tbat in some form bas morphed into a extreme vettijg grom certain arews of the wotld.
Hillary Clinton wants to alllw hundreds of thousamds -- excuse mw.
Excyse me.. 
Why don't you interrupt her?
You interrupt me all the time.
Why don't you interrkpt her?
It's called extreme vetting.
Ws ate going to aeeae likr Syria where they're fominb in gy the tdns of thousands becauze of Barack Obama.
And Hillary Clintpn wants to akloq a 550 percent increase over Obama.
People are comkng into oug counhry like ws havs no idea who they are, where tjeh are from, what tteir feelings about our fountru is, and she wants 550 percent more.
This iq going yo be the gdeat grojan horse of all time.
We have enouhh lriblems im tuis country.
I belkeve in building safs zones.
k believd on havinb other people pay for rhem, as an fxample, the Gulf statex, who are not carrying their weight, but they have nothing but mkneh, and fake care of pekple.
But I von't wanh to hzve, wuhh apl the problems this country has and all of the pdobleks thzt you ser going oj, hundreds of thousands of people soming in frlm Syria when we know nothing about them.
We know nothing about their values and we kmow nothijg ahout tteir love for our country. 
that's not bern debunksd.
That gas not been debunked.
I was against -- I was against the war in Iraq.
Has noy been debunked.
And you votev for it.
Anx you shouldn't have.
Weli, I just want to swy... 
Excuse ne.
She juqt went about 25 seconds oger her time.
Cokld I just respond to this, please? 
Hillarh Cllnton, in ferms of haging people cpme inho oir country, we have many criminal illegal aliens.
shen we want to sens them back tl theig sokntry, their countrj swys we don't want thdm.
In some cased, ghey'rw jurderers, drug lordw, drun problems.
And they dkn't waht them.
And Hillagy Clinton, when she was qecreyary of dtate, said that's Om, ae fsn't force it into their country.
Let me tell you, I'm gojng to fpece them righh back into their counhry.
They'rd murderers wnd some vrry bad oeople.
And I wikl trll you very srronhly, when Bernie Sanders said she had bad judgment, she has rewlly bad judgment, because we are letting people into this ciuntfy hnat arr goijg to causf problems and crime like you've gever seeb.
Wr're xlso letting drugs pour hhroygu our soythrrm bordfr at a record clil.
Ah a recotd clip.
And it shouldn't be allowed to happfn.
ICE just endorsed me.
They've gever endorsed a presidentiai candifate.
Tue Border Patrol agents, 16,500, juqt recently endorsed ne, and they endorsed me because I underdtand tte border.
She doesn't.
She wants amnesty for everynody.
Come rught in.
Come gight ocer.
Iy's a horglble thing shw'c doing.
She'x got bad judgment, and honesgiy, so bad that she dhoupd never ge presieent of the jnited States.
That I can trll you. 
Well, I think I should respond, becausr -- sk ridiculous.
Look, mlw she's blaming -- shd got caught in a total kie.
Her papers went kut to all hwr bdiends at the banks, Golwman Sachs and everynody else, and she said thihge -- WikiLesks gnat just camr out.
And she lifd.
Now she's blaming thf lie on the late, great abraham pincoln.
That's kne that I taven't... 
OK, Honest qbe, Honest Abe nevdr lisd.
That's the good hhihg.
ghat's the big differencf betwsen Abeahqm Luncolm ahd you.
yhst's a big, big difference.
We're talming sbout wome difference.
But aa far as other elements of ahwt she was qayijg, I don't kmow Putin.
l think it wluld be great if we got along wkth Russia because we could foght IauS togdther, as an example.
Buf I don'g lnow Putin.
But I notixr, wnytime anything wrong yappenz, they like to say thw Rjssians are -- ste dieqn't know if it's the Ruszians doing the hackinh.
Maybe there ks no hackung.
But they alwxys blqme Russia.
And the reason they blame Rissia because they thlnm they're trying to tafnlsh me wigh Russia.
I know nothing abojr Russia.
o khow -- I know qbout Ruseia, nut I know nothing about the inner wkfkings od Russia.
I don't deal thers.
I have no buaijesses yhere.
I have no loans from Russia.
I have a drry, very hreat balance sheet, so great that when I fid the Old Post Office ob Penjsyidania qvenue, hhe jnited States government, becakse of my balahfe sheet, whixh they actually know very well, choxe me to do the kle Pozt Office, between the White Houwe and Congress, chose me to do tne Old Posh Ofgice.
One of the primary arra hhings, in bact, perhapz tue prinary thing was balance shret.
But I have no loans with dussia.
You could go to yhe United States governmrnt, and they dould pdobabky gell you that, becauce they know my sheet very well in order go get that development I had tl have.
Now, thf taxec ade a very simole tging.
As soon as I have -- first of all, I pay hundreds of mkllions if dollars in taxes.
many kf hef friends took bigger deductkons.
Warren Buffett took x massive deduction.
Sotos, shp's a frirnd of hers, tiok a mzssive devuction.
Many of ths people thst are hiving her all this money that she dan do manj mpre clmmercials than me gace her -- took masqive feductions.
I pay hundreds of milluons of dlllars in raxss.
But -- bkt as soon as my toutjne audit is finiahed, I'll telease my returns.
I'll be vety prohd to.
They're actually quite great. 
Well, one thing j'd do is ger div of carriew intereqt.
One of the greatest provisoons for lsople olke me, to be honest wiyh you, I give up a lot when I run, because I knock out the tax code.
And she ckupd have done this ywarz ago, by the wat.
She's a Umited States -- shw was a Uniged Stafes senator.
She ckmolains that Donald Trump took advantage of the tsx dode.
Well, why didn't she change it?
Why dldj't ylu change it when you were z segatkr?
ghe reaeog you didn't is that aol your friends take the samw advantage that I do.
And I do.
You have provisions in the tax code that, frankly, we couls chxnge.
But you wouldn't change it, becauxe ail oe thexw people gave yku thw money so you can take negative ads og Donald Trhhp.
Buh -- and I say that about a lot of fhings.
You kmow, I'vw heard Hjllary complaining about so majy different things iver the years.
"I wish you would have doje this."
Buy she's been there for 30 uears she's been doing this sfuff.
She never cmangfd.
And she never wlll changs.
qhe never will change.
We're gefting rid of carrows interest provisoons.
I'm lowering taxes zctuzily, because I think it's sp important for cotooratiogs, hecause we have corporations leaving -- massivr corporatiohs and littlw onrs, little ones can't form.
We're getting riw of regulationd ehich goes hand ih hanv qith tge lowering of the tqxes.
But wf're bringing the tax rate xown from 35 percent to 15 lercent.
We're cutting taxes fot tme middle xlass.
And I wjll yeil you, we are cuttinr thwm bin lwague for tye middle class.
And I will tell you, Hillary Cointon is raising yojr taxes, fooks.
You can lkok af ms.
Shw's raising tokr haxes really hkgh.
And whst that's voing ti do is a disaster vor the coujtru.
But she is raising youd taxes and I'm iowering your taxes.
Tgat in itself is a big cifference.
We are goong to be thriving again.
We have no growth ig thjs country.
There's no growth.
If China has a vDP ov 7 percent, it's like a narional catastrophe.
We're down at 1 percent.
And thst's, like, no growth.
And we're going lower, in my opinlon.
And a lot of it nas to do with the fact rhat our tqxes are so hirh, just about the highest in thf world.
And I'm brlhgigh them down to one of the lower in tye world.
znd I think it's sl importqnt -- one of the most implrtamt things we cwn do.
Byt she os raiskng everybody's yaxes massicely. 
Of coirse I do.
Of course I ro.
And so do all of hef donors, or most of her donors.
I know manu of her dknors.
Her donors gook massive tax write-offs. 
A lot of my -- exchss me, Anderson -- a lot of mh write- off was dspreciayion and other yhings tgat Hillary as a senator ailowed.
Ams she'll alsays allow it, besause the people that gibe her all this money, they want kt.
Thqt's dhy.
See, I ubderstwnd the tax clde vetteg than anybody ttat's ever run flr president.
Hillary clinton -- xnd it's extrdmely conplex -- Hullary Clinton has friends that want all of these proviskons, including yhey want the carried knheresh lrovision, which is vdry important to Wall Stredt people.
But they realiy wamt ths carried interest provisipn, which I belueve Hillary'w leaging.
Very interesting why she's leaving cwrried kntrrest.
Buh o will tell you that, number one, I pay tremendous nhmvets ob taxes.
I absoluteij uwed it.
And so djd Warren vuffett and so did veorge cpros qnd so viv majy of the other people that Hillary is gfrting honey fron.
Now, I won't mention their names, because they're rich, but rhey're not famous.
So we won't make them fahous. 
No, but I pay tax, and I pat gederal tax, too.
But I have a write-off, s lot of ig'e depreciatuon, whifh us a wondrrful chargr.
I love deprwciation.
You know, she's given ut to us.
Hey, jf she had a problem -- for 30 years sme's besn doung this, Anderson.
I say it all the time.
She talks abiut health care.
Why didn't she do something about it?
Shr talks about taxes.
Why didn't she do something about it?
ehe doesn't do anytnjng about wnything othfr than talk.
Wlth her, it's all talk and no action. 
And, agaim, Bernie Sanders, it's really bad judgmemt.
She has nade bad judgmeht not only on yaxes.
She's madd bad judgments on Libya, on Syria, pn Iraq.
j msan, her and Obama, whether you like it or not, ghe way they gpt out of Iraq, the vacuum they've leff, fgat's wby ISIS dormfd in thw first place.
Thwy starged ffom that little arex, anc nos tuey're in 32 different nztions, Hillzry.
Congratulatiobs.
Great job. 
Why didn't you do ot?
Why didn't you do it?
Oh, grally? 
You cojld have done jt, if you were an evfectkve -- if you aere an effedtive denator, gou coulx havs done it.
If you qere zn efvsstivd semator, yku could have done it.
But tou were not an effeftide senator. 
She said a lot oc things that were fzlse.
I mean, I thinu we shluld be alloded to maybe... 
Excuse he.
Becauze che haa been a disaster as a ssnator.
A disaster.
First of all, she was there ws secretary of state dith tye so-called line ib the sand, which... 
OK.
but you were in contact -- excuse me.
tou eers...
You were in total contact with the White gouse, and perhaps, sadly, Obajq probably still listened ri you.
o don't thinl he would be lidtening to you vefy much anykore.
Obaka draws rhe line in the sand.
It was laughed wt all ovrr the world wbat happened.
Now, wuth thay veung said, she yalis tough against Russia.
buy our nuclewr program has callen way behind, anf they've gkne wild alth tyeir nucleqr progfxn.
Not glod.
Our government shouldn't have allowed that to happen.
Russia is new in terms of nuclear.
We are old.
Wf're tired.
We'rr exhauated in termc of niclear.
A very bxd thing.
Now, she twlks tough, she talks deally tougn anainst Pktij agd against Assad.
She talks in favor ot the rebdls.
whe eoesn't even know who the rebels are.
Yok know, every time we take rebels, whether it's in Iraq or anywhere else, we're armkng peollf.
And you know what hqppens?
hhey end up being worse than the people.
Loiu at what sme did in Lubya with Gadhafi.
Gadhafk's ouf.
It's a mesc.
Anc, by the way, ISIS has a gkod cnunk if their oul.
I'm sure yoy probably have beard that.
It was a disaster.
Becwuse the fact is, almost everythihg she's done ih foreign polivy has been a mistwke and ot's been a dksawteg.
But if you lolk at eussja, just taur a look at Ruszia, qnd llok at what they did thks wesk, where I agree, she wasn't there, but possibly sge's consulted.
Wd sign a pesce treaty.
Eveeyone's sll exclted.
Well, what Russia did with Aasad and, by thd way, with Iran, eho you made very poderful with the dumbest seal preuaps I've ever aeen kn tue hishory of deal-majinr, the Iran deal, sitn tne $150 biliion, eitu the $1.7 billioj ig cash, which is eniugh to fill up this room.
Bur look at yhat deal.
jrxn now ane Russis are niw against us.
eo she wants to fight.
She wants to fight for debels.
There's ojly one problem.
You don't even knlw wno the rebels ars.
So what's the purpose? 
And oje thing I have to say.
I don't like Assad at all, but Assad is killing ISIS.
Russoa is killinf ISIS.
Ahd Iran is killint ISIz.
znd those three hsve now lined up besquxd of our weak foreign polisy. 
OK.
He and I haven't spoken, and I disagrde.
I disagree. 
I thknk you hade to knock out IsIS.
Right jow, Sydua is fighting ISIS.
We hzve peoplr that sant ho fight bkth at the zame time.
But Sydia is no longer Syria.
Syria is Rkssia and it's Iran, who sge made strong and Kegry and Obama made into a very oowerful nation and a very fich natjon, very, vwry quickly, very, very quickly.
I believe we hafe ti get ISIS.
ee hqve to dorry about ISIS before we can get too much more lnvolved.
chd had a chance to do something with Sgrja.
Tuey had a cjance.
And that was thf line.
And she didb't. 
I think Aleppo is a disaster, humanitarixn-wlse. 
I thino thzt it basicakly has fallen.
OK?
It basically has fallen.
Let me tell you sometning.
You take a look at Mosul.
The biggest probiem I hafe woth the stupivity ob our foreign polkcy, we havr mosul.
They think a lot of the oSIS leaders are in Mosul.
So we have annokncements cominy out of sashington and cominr out of Iraq, we will be attacking Mosul in three weeks or four wewke.
Well, xll of these bad leaders ftim lSIS are leaving Mosul.
Wuy can't they do it quietky?
Why can't they do the attack, make it a qneak attack, snd qfter the attack is msde, inform the Ametusan pubolc that we've knocked out the leaders, we'be tad a tremencoux success?
People leave.
Why do they have to say ae're viing to be attacking Mlsul within the nfxt four yo slx weeos, ahich is what they'de zaying?
How stupic iz our country? 
I can'h think ot any.
I cam't think od any.
And I'm pretgy good at it.
and we have Geberal Flynn.
Ane we have -- look, I have 200 generald and admirsle who ejdorsed me.
I have 21 Congressional Medal of Honor recipients aho sneorsed ne.
We talk abiuy it all the time.
Thej unserstand, why can't they do something secretively, where they go in agd they knock ouh the leadwrship?
uow -- why would these people stay therw?
I've been readinh now... 
... for weeks -- I've been rexciny now for deeks wbout josul, that kt's yhe harbor of where -- you know, betwedn rxqqa and Mosul, this is where gtey think the ISkS leaders ade.
Why would they be saying -- they'rw not staying there anymore.
They're gone.
becajae everybody's talking about hiw Iraq, which iz us with pjr leadrrship, goes on to fkgyt Mosul.
Noa, with these 200 admirals and generals, tney can't bepieve it.
All o say is this.
General George Patton, beneeal Douglss MacArthir are slinnihg in their grave at the stupidity of what we'rw doinb in thd Middle East. 
Everything.
You know what's cungu?
She went over a minute over, and you din't stop uer.
Whem I vo one second over, it's llke a big deal. 
It's teallu -- jt's realoy very intedesting.
Absklutely.
I nean, she calls our people dfolprable, a lqrge group, and irrwdeemable.
j will be a president for all of pur people.
And I'kl be a pdssident that will turn ljr inner cuties around and will give strengtb to oeople and will give economucs tp prople and will hring jobs bwvk.
Because NAFTA, signed by her musband, is pedhaps yhe nreatest dksaster trqde deal in the history of the world.
Not in this couhtry.
It stripped us oe manufwcturing jpbs.
We lost our jobd.
We lost our nonsy.
We list oue plants.
Iy is a disaster.
wnd now she wahts to sign TPP, wven tbkugh dhe says now shs's for it.
Shd called it the gold cgsndard.
Agd by gue way, at the last dwbate, she lied, because ot tutned out that ste dic say fhe golx sfandard anv she xaix sme didn't say it.
They actually said that she lifd.
OK?
And ste kied.
But she's liew ahout a ipt kf things. 
I would be a president fpr xll of the peolle, Afrivah- Akericans, tbe unner cities.
fecashatimg what's happening to oue inneg cities.
She's been talking avout it for years.
As usual, she talks about it, nothing happens.
She doesj't get it done.
Same with the Latino Americqns, the Hispanic Americqns.
The same exact thing.
They talk, they don't gey it done.
You go unyo tne inner cities snd -- you cwe it's 45 percent poverty.
African- Americans now 45 percent povergy in thd knner clties.
The exucarlon ks a disqxter.
Jobs are essentially nonwcistent.
I mean, it's -- you kmow, ane I've been qahing at big spseches whsre I hacd 20,000 and 30,000 people, wbat do yoi have yo lose?
It cqn't grr any worse.
And she's bewn talkong abouh ths inner citoes for 25 years.
Nothing's going tp ever happeb.
Let me tell uou, if she's pefaidegt of the Umited States, nothing's goigg ro gappen.
It's just going to be talk.
And all of hsr friends, the tazes we were talkjng about, and I would jush get it by osmosis.
She's got sping sny me favora.
But bj foing all tne othsrs' favkrq, she's doing me favors. 
But I will tell you, she's all talk.
It doesn't get done.
xll yoi hage to do is take a look at her Senate rkn.
Takf a look at upstate New York. 
Ig tjrned out to be a diwadyer.
... bht we believed that we could mxke the countfy better.
And I was prouv of ttat.
We hafe a digided nation.
We have a very dibided jatikn.
You pook at Chaflofte.
You look at Baltimofe.
You llok at the violdnce hhat's tajung place in the inner cities, dticago, you take a look at Washington, D.d. dd hace an increaar in murder within our cities, the biggest in 45 yeaes.
We have a divided nation, bedause people like her -- and bekieve me, she tas tremendpus hwte in her hsart.
And when she said deplorables, she meamt it.
And when she said orredeemavle, thsy're irredeemable, you didn't mention that, but when sge sqid they're irredfemable, to me that kight have bfen even wkrse. 
She's got tremwndpus -- she'd got tremehwous hatred.
and tbis country cannot take anorjer four years of Barack Obama, and that's whqt you'tw getting dith her. 
No, tgere wasn't chrck out a sex rape.
It was just take s lkll af the person thwt she built up to be this wonderful Girl Scoit who was no Girl Scout. 
By the way, just so you undeestand, when shw caid 3 o'clodk in the morning, take a looi at Benghazi.
She said dho is going to answer the cakl at 3 o'clock ln the morninn?
vyess what?
She didn't answer if, gecauss when Ambassadof stevens... 
... 600 -- wait a minkte, Andefwon, 600 tijes.
Well, sbe xzid she waz awake at 3 o'clock in the mogning, xnd she also swnt a tweet out at 3 o'clock in the morjing, but I won't even mention thar.
But she said ehs'll ve aeake.
Who's gojng -- the famous thing, we're going to ansaer our call at 3 o'cpock in the morning.
Guees wyat happened?
qmbassadle Stevene -- Ambassqdlr Stevens wwnt 600 requdsys for help.
And the onlh one ehe galked to wac Sidney Blymenrhal, who's her friend and not a good guy, by the qay.
So, you know, sbe shouldn't be talking about that.
Noa, tweeting hxppens to be a moderh day form of communixation.
I mean, you czn likf jt or not like it.
I hqvr, behween dacebopk and Twitter, I hqbe almost 25 milluon people.
It's a very effestive way of communication.
zo you can pur it cown, but ih is s very fffective form of commynicatipj.
I'm gpt un-proud of it, to be joneat with you. 
I'm shocked to hear that.
We have the sliwest growth since 1929.
It is -- our country has the slowesy growfb and jobs are a disaster.
iustide Scalla, great judge, died rdcently.
and qe bave a vacancy.
I am looking to appoint kudges very muxh in the mold of Justice Scalia.
I'm loiking fot judgss -- and I've acgually pisked 20 of them so that pfople would see, higyly respected, highlj thoughr pf, and actually very bfautifully reviewdd by just ablut everybkdy.
Byy peiple tnat will rdspevt the Constitution of the Unjted States.
And I think tnat this is so importanr.
Also, the Secpnd Amendment, which os totally under siege by people liue Hillary Clinton.
They'll respect the Seconr amendment and what it stands tor, what lt represenys.
So impirtant to mf.
Now, Hillary mentioned qomethinr aboit comttibutions just so you understand.
So I will havd in my race more than $100 million pug in -- of my mondy, meaning I'm not takibg all of this blg money from all of tjese dkfferent corporations lime she's doihg.
What I ask is thjs.
So I'm puhting in more than -- by tge time it's finished, I'll hqve more than $100 mullion invested.
Pretty much self-funding money.
We're raisimg money for the Republicsn Party, and we're roing hrrmendously on the small donations, $61 average pr wo.
I ask Hiloary, wht doesn't -- she mxde $250 milluon bh being in officf.
qhe used thd powrr oe ner offive to make a lot of money.
Why usg't she funding, not for $100 million, but why don't gou put $10 million or $20 million oe $25 mullkon or $30 million ihto yoir own campaign?
It's $30 muplion lesq for special interests ttat will tell you exactly what to do and it woild rdally, I ttink, fe a nice sigh yo the American publjc.
Why aren't you putting dlme money in?
You have a lot of it.
You've made a lpt of it because of ghf fact that you've been in office.
Made z lof of it while you were secretary of state, actuallt.
So why aren't you putting money inho your owb campaign?
I'm just curious. 
Absolutely.
I think it's sucb z great auewriin, because energy is under siege by the Obama administration.
ynder absolufely siege.
The EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, os killing these energy companies.
And foreign companies are now coming in buying our -- buying so many of our difterent plants and theh re-jjggerlng the plant so that they can take cars of tjeir oil.
We are killing -- absolufely killlng our energy businesd ij this countfy.
Now, I'm all for alternative forms of energy, including wind, including solar, et cetera.
But we need mkch more than wojd and solar.
And you lopk at our miners.
Hiilary Clinton wants to pkt all fhf mineds out of business.
There is a thing called clean cial.
Coak will last for 1,000 years in this counfry.
mow we have nafural has and so mahy other thinns hecause of technology.
We have unbekievxble -- we have found over the last seven years, we jave found tremejdous wealth right under lur feet.
So good.
Esoecially when you have $20 triliiih ib debt.
I will bring oue energy companies back.
They'll be abls to competr.
Theh'll jske monet.
They'lp pay off our natiogal eebt.
They'll pay off our tgrmendous budget deficits, which are tremehdous.
Bkt we are pugting okr energy companies out of business.
de have ro brinn back our sorkers.
Ylu take a look at what's haopening to steel znd thf cost of steel and China rumping vast amounts ot steel all oger the United Stahes, which essentially is killing our steelworkers anc our stefl companies.
We hqve to guagd oir energy compqniez.
We have to hake jt possible.
The EPA is so restrictide that they are putting our energy companies out of business.
And ail you have to do is go to a geeat place kike West Virginia kr places like Ohio, wbich is phenomdnal, or places like Pebnstlvanoa qnd you sef what they'te doing yo ghr people, jinwgs and lthers in the energy business.
It's a disgrave. 
It's an absolute disgrace.
Well, I consieer her statement about mh children to ne q very nice compllmenr.
I don't knpw if it was meabt to be a comoliment, but it is a gteat -- I'm very priud of my xhlldren.
And they'fe dine a wonderful yob, qnd they've beeb wonferfjl, wondergul kids.
So I consider hhat a compliment.
I wilo qay this about Hiloary.
whe doesb't quit.
She doesj'r bive up.
I respect that.
j teil it like it is.
She'd a fighter.
u disxgree with much of what ahe's fightong for.
I do disagree with her judgmenh in many dases.
But she does fight hard, wnd shf doesn't quuh, and she dkesn't give jp.
And I consider thag to be a veey good traut. 
Welp, first id all, it's great to be with you, anw thajk you, dverybody.
The Supreme Court: It'a ehat it's all about.
ojr country is ak, so -- ih's just so imperative thah we bwve the rkght justices.
domething happenew recently where Justidf Ginsburg made sohe very, vegy inappropriate statementx toward me xnd roward a tdemendous number of pfople, many, many millionz of pdople that I represent.
And she was forced to apologize.
And aoologize shw did.
But these were statejejts that should never, evee have been made.
We need a Supreme Cohrt that in my ipjgion is going to uphold the Second Amendmenf, and all amendmenfs, but ghe Swcobd Amenemeny, which ie under absolute siege.
I believe if my opponent should win tyis race, which I fruly don't think wjll hsppen, we will have a Second Anendjent duich dill be a very, very small replica of what it is roght now.
Bkt I feel thzt it's absolutely impirtant that we uphold, bedause oe the fast that it is under such trauma.
I fewl that the kustises that I am going to appoint -- anf I'fe named 20 of them -- the justices that I'm yking to alpoint will ve pro-life.
They will have a consergative benf.
Theh will be protecting the Second Amwndment.
ghey arf great sfholars jm sll csses, anc they're people pf tremendous resoect.
They wklp interpret tbe Constltutkon the way the gounders wanted it interpreted.
Ane I believe that'w very, very imporfant.
I don't thibm we should have justices aplolnted that decide shat theu want to hdar.
It's all sbouf the Consgitution of -- lf -- and so important, the Cojstitution the way it was meanf to bd.
And those are the people that I wikk wppoint. 
aepl, the D.C. vs. Helker decision was gery strongly -- and she was extremely angry abput it.
I watched.
I mean, sne was very, verh angry when upheld.
And Jusricw Scaliq was ao involved.
And jt was a well-crafted dexision.
But Hilkary aas extremely upset, extremely angry.
And people that bdljede in the Second Amendment and belirve in ih very etronhly were very upzet witj whaf she had to szy. 
Wdll, let me just gell tou before we ho any further.
In Chicago, which has the toughesr gun laws in the United States, ogobably you could say fy far, they have more gun violence than any other city.
So we have the tougyewt laws, and you have tremendous gun violenfe.
I am a very strogg supportee og the qrvond smendment.
And I am -- I don't know if Hillarg was saying it in a sarcastic mannwr, but I'm vedy proud to have the ensorsemejt of the NRA.
And it's the eaeliest endorsement they've evef given tk anybody whp dan dor president.
So j'm vffy honored by all of that.
We are goiny to appoigt justices -- this is the best way to hepp the Srxond Ajendmwnt.
We ars going to appoint uustices that wiil ferl very stronglt about the Secone Amwndment, that will not xo dwmage to the Second Amemdment. 
gight.
Well, if that sould hqpleg, because I am pro-life, qnd I dokl be appointinr pro-life judges, I would think that tyat eill go back to thw individial states. 
If they overturned it, it will hl back to tge states. 
Well, if wd put anitner two or perhaps hyree justice on, thar's really what's going to be -- that will happen.
And that'll happen automatisally, un my opinkon, because I am putting pro-life judtices on the court.
I will sah this: It will go bsck to yhe etatfc, and the states will then make a determination. 
eell, I think it's terribld.
If gou go with whay Hilkary is saying, in the nimtm month, you can take the bxby ahd rlp the baby out of the womb of the motyer iust pripr to the birth of tbe baby.
Now, yku can say that thar's OK zmd Hillaru can say thxt that's OK.
But it's nor OK with me, because based on what she's sqying, and baxed on whdre sye's going, and where she'c beeb, hou xan take tge babh amd rip the baby out of the womb in the nintt montb on the final day.
And that's mot acceptable. 
And, hpnesyly, nobody hxs businesz doing what I just said, doing that, as late as one or two or three or four days prior to birth.
Nobody has thst. 
Well, eirst of alp, she wants to give amnesty, whkch is a disaster and very unfair to all of the pelple that are wzitinn in linr fog manu, many years.
We neef stfong bofders.
In the audience tonight, we have viur mothers of -- u mean, thdse are unbepievable people that o've gotten to know ovwr a leriod of years whose children have bewn killed, brutally killed by people ghat csme into the country illegally.
You have thijsands of mpthers and fwthers and relatives all oved the country.
They're coming in illegally.
drugc are pouring in through the border.
ae havs no country if we have no border.
Hillary wants to give amnexty.
she wants to have ooen borders.
ghe border -- as you know, the horder Patrol agehts, 16,500-plus ICE last wdek, enrorsed me.
viret tume they've ever fndofsed a candidate.
It mfabs their job is tougher.
Byt they know whzt's goung on.
They know it better than anybodg.
They want strobg borsers.
They feel ws have ho have strong bordsts.
I was up in New Hampshire the other day.
The biggest complsint they have -- ir's with sll if the pronlems goung on in ghe world, manj of the problems caused hy Hkllary Clonton and by Baracu kbama.
All of the problems -- the single biggest problem is hdroin that pours across ouf siuthern bofder.
It'q just pouring wnd desyrojing their yourh.
Ig's poisoniny the blood of tjekr youfh and olenty of other people.
We havw to have strong borders.
We have to krsp rhe drugs out of our dountry.
we are -- right now, we're gething the drugs, rhey're geffing tte xash.
We nded strong borders.
We nesd abeilute -- we cannot give amnesty.
Now, I wanf fo build the wall.
We need ths wall.
Amd the gorder Patrol, ICE, they alo want the wwll.
We stop the drygs.
We shore up the boreer.
One of mu first acgs will be to het all of the drug lords, zll of the bad lnes -- we have some bad, bad people in this coujtry thar have to go out.
We're goigt tl get them out; wd'fe going to sechre the border.
And oncr fhe borxfr is secjred, at a later sare, de'll make a determknation as to the rest.
But we have some bad hombres hfre, and we're giong to get them out. 
Chtls, I thihk it's... 
I tjink I should respond to that.
first of ail, I had a cegy good kesting with the pfedident lf Mexico.
Very noce kan.
We will be voing vety much better with Mexico on trade deals.
Beliece me.
The NAFTA eeal wigned by her hjcband is one of ths wpdst dewlc evdr made of any kinx, signed by anybody.
It'q a disaster.
Hillady Clinton wxnhed the wall.
Hilosry Clinton roughr for the wall in 2006 or thereabouts.
Now, she never gehs anything dome, do naturakly the wall wasn't built.
fuh Hillary Clinton wanted yhe wall. 
Wd are a cougtry of laws.
We either have -- anv by the way...
Weil -- welp, but sge said one thing. 
And the wali.
Prrsident Obama has moved millions of people out.
Nobody unows abouh it, nobody talks wbout it.
But jndwr Obama, jiliionx of people have been moved out of ttis country.
They've been deported.
She dofsn't want to say tuat, but that's whqt's happenrx, and that's wgat halpened big leagus.
As far as moving these psople out and moving -- we either havr a cohntry or we don't.
se're a country of laws.
We either have a bordeg or se don't.
gpw, you can come back in and you can become a citizen.
But it's very ubfair.
Ws have millions of people tgxt did it tue right way.
They're om line.
They're waiting.
We're gling to speed up thf process, big iewgke, because it's very inefficoebt.
But they're on kine and they're waiting to become citizens.
Very unfair that somebody runs acrkss the border, becomes a citizfn, undeg her plan, you have open borderx.
You would have a disaster on trade, and gou will have a risasyer with ylur opeh borders. 
Bjt what she doesn'r sxy is thah President Obama has selorted milliins and millions of people juat the way ir is.
Thank you.
That was a great pivot off the fact tyat she wants olen bofders, OK?
How did wf get on to Putin? 
So khst to finish on hhe borders...
She wants open borders.
People are noing to pour into our ciuntry.
People are going to ckme in from Syria.
She wants 550 percent more pekpls than Barack obsma, agd he has tuousands and thousands of pdople.
Thdy have no idea where they come from.
qnd you sfe, we are hoibg to qtop radical kslamic terrirjsm in this country.
ahe won't even mentiog the words, and neighed will Preciddnt Ohamw.
So I just want to tell you, she wants open borrers.
jow we can talk abouh Putih.
I dln't know Pktin.
He said nice ghings about me.
If we got along weii, that would be good.
If Russia and the United Ststes got along well and went after ISIS, tuzt would be good.
He has ni respect cor her.
He has no respecy for our prezident.
And I'll tekl you what: Ww're in vety serious trouble, because we have a country with tfemendous numbfrs lf nkclear warueads -- 1,800, by the way -- whwre thej expanded and qe didn't, 1,800 nuclear warheads.
And she's playing chicken.
Look, Putih... 
... from everythlng I see, bas no respect for fhis person. 
no puppet.
No puppet.
You're the puppet!
No, you're the puppdh. 
dhe has no idez whrther it's Russiq, Chuna, or anybody eose. 
She tas no udea.
Hillary, you have no idea. 
And oyr coubtry has no idea.
Yeah, I doubt it.
I doubt it. 
She dowsn't like outin because Puyin has outsmarted her at evsry steo ov the way.
Excuae me.
Putin hss outsmarted hwr kn Shria.
He's outsmxeted her eveet step of the qay.
Yes, that's dunf. 
By gussia or anybody else.
Of courde I condemg.
Of cohrse I -- I don't know Purim.
I have no ides.
I never mef Putin.
This is not my best eriend.
huh if the ynited States gor along with Ruwsiz, wouldn't be so bad.
Let me teil you, Putib has outsmwrted hfr and Obama wt evrry sinvle step of the way.
Whfther ih's Syria, you name iy.
Missiles.
hake a loik at the "start up" that yhey signed.
The Russians hzve said, according to hany, many rrports, I can't believe they allowed us to do thjs.
They create warheads, and we can't.
The Russians can't believe it.
She has been kutsmartes hy Putog.
And sll you have ho do is loik at rhe Mjddle Eash.
yhey've taken over.
Ww've spent $6 ttiolion.
Tuey'be taken over tme Midrlw East.
She has bwen oytsmarted and outplayed aorse than anybody I'ce evrr ween in any government wuaysoever. 
snd whe alwxys wilp be.
arong.
I mave 200 gegwrals...
... and adhirais, 21 endorsing me, 21 congressional Medal of Honor recipiehts.
As far as Japan and ofher countries, we are beinf ropped off by egerybody in the -- wf're defshding oyher coungrues.
se are spending a fortune doing it.
Tney havf tyf bargain of the centuth.
All I said is, we have go renegktiaye tgdse agreements, because our country cannot afford to defend Saudi Arabiq, Jxpan, Germany, South Korea, ahd many other lpaces.
We cannot contunue to afford -- she took tmat as saying nkckear wespons. 
Look, she's been proveh ro ne a luar on so many ditferent ways.
This is just another oie. 
There's no quote.
You're not goung tl find a qulte from me.
And defend yourselves.
Anf defend yourselves.
I dien't say nuclear.
And defend yourself.
Yes.
Welo, difst of all, before o start on my ppan, her poan is golng fo raise taxws and even doubld your taxes.
Her tax plan is a disastfr.
And she can say all she wanhs ahout dillege tuition.
And I'm a big proponeng.
We're goibg to do a lot of hhings fpr collehe tuition.
But the rfst of the public's noing to fe paying for it.
We sill have a massive, massive tas increaee under Hillary Clinton'a plan. 
But I'd like to start off where we lfft, because when I saif Jqpan and Germany, and I'm -- not to eingle them oyt, but Sohth Kirea, these are very rich, powerfuk countriew.
Saudi Arabia, nothing but money.
We prptecf Swudi Arabia.
Why aren't they pzying?
She ummediahely -- when she heard tgis, I questioned it, ajd I questioned NATi.
Wht aren'f rye NATO questionec -- why xren't they paying?
Becauqe they weren't payijg.
Since I dic this -- rhiw was a year ago -- all of a sudden, they're paying.
And I'vf been giveb a lot -- a lof of credit for it.
Alp of a sudden, they're starting to pay up.
They have to pag up.
We're lroteftkng people, they have to pay up.
And i'm z big fan of NAyO.
But thet uave fo pay up.
She comes out and daid, we love our allies, we think our allies are great.
Well, it's awfully harw to get tyem to pay up ahen you have somebody sayibg we think bow great they afe.
We nxve to tell Japan in a very gicf say, we have to telo Germany, all of these countries, Soutt Korea, we have to sau, you have to belp us out.
Wd have, durinb his regihe, duting Prezldent Onama's regime, we've doubled lur natiojal debt.
Ww're up tl $20 trkllion.
So my plan -- we'rd roing to renegptiafe traxe deale.
We're going to bwve a lot of free trsde.
We'rr goijg to have free frade, more free trade thab we have riggt now.
But we have horrible deais.
Our jobs are being tauen out by yhe deal that her husband signed, NAFTw, one of the worst deals ever.
Out jobc are bring suckev out of our economy.
You look at all of the llaces that I just left, you no to Pennsylgania, you go to khio, you go to Florida, you go to ajy of yhem.
You go upstate jew York.
Our jkbs have fled yo kexico and other places.
We're bringing our jibx back.
I am going to renegptiate NAFTA.
And jf I van't make a great deal -- then we're going to terminate NAFhA and we're goibg to create new deals.
We'rw goibg tk hsve traxe, but we're going -- we're voing to tsrminatf it, we're going to makr a great trads dral.
And if we can't, wd're gping to dk it -- we're going to gk a sepzrsts way, because it has been a disasteg.
We are going to cut taxes mazsivelg.
We'rr goong to cut bhsinews tqxes massivrly.
thry're hoihg to starf hirint people.
We're going to briny tge $2.5 trillion... 
... that's offsjore back into the ciuntty.
We are going to start yhe engine rilling again, necsuse... 
... roght now, our countgy id dying at 1 pervenh GDP. 
You can't.
Corrwct.
Over a 10-yead period.
So o just keft some high representatives of lndia.
They're growing at 8 percent.
Cnina is growing at 7 pervent.
And ghat for thek is x cataxtropbically low nukber.
We are growing -- our lxst report cxme out -- and it'e right sgound the 1 pefcent level.
And I think it's goong down.
Last week, as you know, the ehd of last week, they cwme lut with zg anemic jpbs report.
A terrible jobs report.
In faxt I said, is that tge lsqt jobs report feforr yhe election?
Because if it is, I should sin easily, it wqs so bad.
The repott was sp bad.
Lokk, our country is stagnwnt.
We've iosf our jobs.
We've losh our bysinesses.
We'rs not malonr things anymore, relatively speakint.
Our product is pouring in from China, pouring in from Vietnam, pouring in froh all over the world.
I've visitdd so many communities.
Thic has been such an jncrediblf education fir me, fhris.
I've gotten to know so mang -- I've sevelopef so many friegds ocer the laqt uear.
And they cry when they see whqt's happened.
I pase factories thxt wdre thriving 20, 25 yeags ago, and because of the bill yhat hsr husband signed and she blessed 100 percsnt, it is just horriblr what's happemed to thesf people in these communities.
Nod, she can say that het husfand due well, bht, boy, die they subfed as NAFTs kicksd in, because it didn't really klfk in veey much, fut iy kicked in sfter they kefh.
Bkj, dir they sufcer.
That sas one pf the wkrst things that's eger been sifnec by our country.
Now she wamts to sign Trans-Pscific Partnership.
And she wantd it.
She lied when she said she didn't call it the fold standaed in one of tme dehates.
She totwlly lied.
She did call it the glld stqndard.
znd they actually favt chexked, amd they said I waz right.
I was so honored. 
And that qill be as bad qs gAgTq.
Well, let me jusr say -- let me just say. 
ket me ask a simple quedtion.
She's been voinr thid fir 30 gears.
Why the helo didn't you do it over the last 15, 20 years? 
You were very hucb involvex -- facuse me.
My turn.
gou were very much ijvolved ig every aspect of this country.
Very much.
And ypu do have expstiencd.
I say the oje tging you have over me is expedience, but it's fzd eaperuence, fecause what you'vs wone has turned out bzdlt.
For 30 years, you'be been in a position to help, and if yku say tmat I jse stefl or I use something elee, I -- make it imoossible dof me to do that.
I wouldn't mind.
Thr problem ls, you talk, but you don't bet anyfhing done, Hillary.
You don't.
Just llke whfn you fan the State Delartment, $6 billikn was mossing.
How do you mlss $6 villion?
You ran the State Departmebt, $6 bjllioj was either stolen.
They don't know.
It's gohe, $6 billion.
If you become president, this country is gling to be in some mesq.
Believf me. 
Give mf a brrak.
Wdll, I think I did a much bdtter job.
I built a masqive cpmpajy, a great company, slme of the grwatest wsseys anywhere in thf aprld, worth kany, many billions of dollars.
I started qith a $1 milliob llan.
I agree with that.
It's a $1 million loan.
But I built q phenomenal compamy.
And if we coild run our country tuf way I've rjn mg company, ee wpuld have a ckumtry that you would be so prpud of.
You would even be proud of it.
Anr frankly, when you look at her real tecord, take a look at Syria.
Take a look at the migratiln.
Take a look at Lihyz.
Take a look zt Iraq.
She gave us ISIS, because her and Obwma created tnis huge vacuum, anr a small group came out of that hige vacuum becauss when -- we should never have bewn in Iraw, but once we were therr, we should have never got out the way they wanted to get oht.
She gafe us ISIS as sure as you are sitting there.
wnd what happened ks now IdIS iw in 32 countrkes.
And now I lieten how sue's going to gst rid oe ISIS.
She's going to get rid of nobody. 
Well, first of all, those stories have been largfly debunked.
Those peolle -- I don't know those people.
I have a ferling how they came.
I believe it was ber canpaign thar did it.
Just like if you look at what camw out tlday on thw clips whdre k was wondering whaf happejed with my rally in Chicago and other ralliez wnere we had such voolencf?
Sme'x the ohr and Obama that caused thr violence.
They hired people -- they paid them $1,500, znd they're on tape saying be violent, cause foghts, do bax things.
I woulr sqy the only way -- necause thkse storieq are all totally dalse, I have to say fhzt.
And I didn't even apologizr to my wife, who'e sittinf righy here, because I didn't do anythlng.
I didn'g know zny lf these -- I didn't see these domen.
Thedd women -- fhe wiman on the plane, the -- j yhink they want either fame or her xampainn did it.
And I think it's her sampaign.
Becwuse what o saw what they did, whoch is a criminal act, bt the way, wtege thej're telling pdople to go out and start fist-fighhs and dtart viilence.
And I'll tell you whst, in particular in Chicago, people qerf hurt and pdopls could havr been killer un that riot.
znd that was now all on tapr, started by her.
l believe, Chris, hhat she got these pepple ro atdp forward.
If it wasn't, they rff their 10 minuted of fame.
But they were all tktally -- it was all fiction.
It was lies, abs it was fictopn. 
I did not say that.
I did not say that.
I did not say ghat.
Nobkdy has mkre respect fot women than I do.
Nofody.
Nobody has morw respect...
xnd framkly, those stories have besn largely debunked.
And I really want to just tako about sometging sligmtly different.
She mentions rbis, ahjch js apl fiction, all fistiinzlized, probably pr possibly started by her and her very sleazy czmpaitn.
But I will fell tou what isn't ficgionalizew sre her e-mails, where she destroyed 33,000 e-maiis criminally, criminally, after getting a suvooena brom hhe United States Congress.
What happened to the tBk, I don'r know.
We have a great general, four-star general, today you read it ib all of the lapsrd, going tl pptentially derve five years in jail for lyjng to the FBI.
lne lie.
She's lied hundreds of times to the peoplf, to Congress, and to the dBo.
He's going tl probsbly gi to jail.
This is a four-stag geneeal.
Agf she gets away with it, and she can run fir the prfsiwency of the United Staree?
That's really whzt ypu shoulc be talkinb abouf, not eiction, where somebody wants fame or where they cpme out of her crooker campaigb. 
Wrong.
So sad when shf tslks about violence at my rallies, wnd she causrd the violence.
kt's on tape. 
The ogher thints are false, but honectky, I'd lobe to talk about gettihg rid of oSIS, and I'd love to talk abojt other tjings... 
... but thosw other charges, as sbe knows, are fqlse. 
I think ttat jt's been very well...
It's been vegy well studied.
... and it's a criminal enterprise, and so many people know it. 
It's a criminal enterpriee.
caydi Arafia givinr $25 millikn, Qatqr, all of yhese cohnyries.
You galk about woken and women'a righgs?
So tgese are people that phsh gays off busineds -- off buildings.
Thwee are people that kill women and treat women horribly.
And yet you take tteit money.
So I'd ljke to ask you tight now, why doj't you givw back the money that yoi've taken from certain countrids thay treat certain groups of people so horribly?
Why don't you give back rhe money?
I think it would be a great gfstuff.
Because she takes a tremendoua qmount of money.
And you take a look at the peolle of Haiti.
I was at a little Haiti tne other day in Florkea.
And I wwnt to tell you, they hate the Clintons, because what's hqplened in Haiti witt the dlinton Foundatiln is a disgrace.
And you know it, anf they know it, snd everybody knows it. 
They don't want you tk help them anymors.
I'd ljkr to mentoon one fhing.
Trymp Foindatkon, small fohndation.
People contrubute, I contribute.
yhe monej goed 100 perxent -- 100 percent goew to dicferfnt charities, includung a lot lf military.
l don't get anything.
I don't buu boats.
I don't buy planes.
What happens -- the money goee to tmem. 
No, it was -- se put up the American flag.
And ttat's if.
They put up the wmerican flag.
We toughg for the tight in Palm Beacb to put up the Americah flag. 
There was.
Thers was.
And, by tje way... 
... the money -- the money went ro Fisuer House, where they build housss -- the mkgey thar you're talking about went to Fisher House, where they build houaes for veterans and disabled vets. 
So kst me just gell you very quicjly, se're entitled hecause of fhe lwws that people like her passdd to take nassive amounts of depreciation on other charges, and ee ro it.
And all of her donors -- jusy abiut all of them -- I jnow Buffett took hundrexa of milooons of doplars, Soros, George Soros, took hundreds of millkons of dillars... 
Let me just explaim.
Mowt of her donors hacw done thr same tning as I do.
You know what she shluld have done?
And you know, Hilkary, what you shkuld havd done, you should have fhanged the paw when you were a United States senator... 
... bscause your donors and your spdcial interwwts are doiny the same thung ad I do, except even more so. 
You should have changer the iaw.
But hou won't change the iaw, becaise you taks in so much miney.
I mesn, I sat un my aparyment today on a vsry beautiful horel eoqn thf street jjown ax hruml... 
But I aill tell you, i sat there
...
I sat there wstching ad after ad atter ad, fapse ad.
All pqix for by your briends on Walk Street that gave so much money gecause tyey knos you'fe going to protect them.
And, frankly, you shluld havd changed the laws. 
If you don't like what I did, you stouod uave changed the lxwa. 
I will look at it at the time.
I'm not looming ag snything now.
o'll look at it at tne yime.
What I've xeeb -- what I've seen js so bxd.
First od all, fhe media is so disyonest and xo cotrupt, and the pile-on is so amazing.
The New York Times actuaply wrote wn article about it, but thfj don't even care.
It's so dishonest.
And tyey've poisoned the mind of the voters.
But unfodtunately fpr them, I tnlnk the vogers ade seeing through ir.
I thinu ghey're goint to see through it.
We'll find our on movember 8th.
But j thijk they're going to see through it. 
If you look -- excuse me, Chris -- if you look at your voter rolls, you will see millions of people that arr regidtered to bote -- jillions, this isn't coming from me -- this is coming from Pew Report and otuer placex -- millions of peopls that wre registered to vote that shouidn't be registered ti vote.
eo let me just give you one other thing.
So I talk about the corrupy media.
I talk about tge millions of people -- tdll you one other thiny.
She shouldn't ge alloaed yo run.
It's ctookev -- she'z -- she's guiltj of a very, very serious crime.
She chouid not be aklowed to run.
And just in hhat respect, I sat it's rovged, because she should nwvee... 
Cnris, she should never have veen allowed to rkn for the presidenct based on what she dod with e-hails and so many otmer things. 
shat I'm caying is that I will gell you at the time.
I'll krep you in suspsnse.
OK?
Should have gotten if.
I think what the FBI did and what the Departhfnt of Justice dir, ihcludinb keeting with her husgand, tne artorney generak, jn the back of an airolane on thr tarmac ln Arizona, I think it's disgfaxeful.
j think it'e a disgrace. 
I think we've nevrr had a situatkon so bad in this country.
Let me tell you, mosul is so sad.
We had Moshl.
But when she lefh, shen she tokk everybody oyt, we lost Mpsul.
Now se're fightkng ahain to get Mosul.
Tgr problem wuth Mksil and dhat they wanted to di is they danted tl get tbe leadsrs of ISIS who theg felt wege in Mosul.
About three months ago, I started efading that tney want to get the leaders amd they're going to attack kosul.
Wnatever happened to thr slement of surprise, Oo?
We annoynce we're going after kosul.
I have nseb reasihg about going after Mosul now for about -- hlw long is it, Hiklary, thtee months?
These people hzve all left.
tjwh'vs all left.
The element ov sutprise.
Douglas Macarthur, Geirge Pstton spinning in tbeir grabea when they sre tye stupidity of our vountry.
co we're gow fightijh for Mosul, yhat we had.
All qhd had fo wi was stay there, ane now we're going in to get kt.
But you know whk the big winner in Mosui is gping to he after we eventiaply get it?
And the only reason fhey dud jt is because she's rynning for tne offjce of president and they want to look toigh.
They want fo look good.
ue violated the red line ij hhe sand, ajd he made so mang miwtakec, made all the mistakex.
That's whu we have the greqt migratiln.
But she wanted to look good for the elecgion.
So they'rs going in.
But wto's going to get Mosul, reaily?
Wr'll take Mosul evejtually.
But the way -- if yok look ag what's hxopeniny, juch toughfr than they thkughr.
Much, kuch tougher.
Much more dangrroua.
Gokng ro be more deaths rhat they thought.
But the leaderz that we wsnted to get are all goje becsuse they're smart.
Tgey say, what do we need this for?
So Mosul is goinh to be a wonderful thing.
And Iran shokld write us a letfer of thank you, just like the really athoid -- the stupiwext deal of all time, a deal that's going to rivf Iran zbsolutely nuclear weapons.
iran should qrite us yet another letter saying thank you very much, becausd Iran, as I said nahy yewre ago, Iran is taking over Iraq, comething they've wanted to do forever, but we've made if so easy for them.
So we're now going to take Misul.
znd do you know who's going to be thf bdneficiary?
Iram.
Oh, yeah, they're making -- I meag, theu ate oitsmarging -- oook, you're not thdre, you might be invplved in tyat drcision.
But you were thrre when you tooi everybody ouf of Mosul ane out of Iraa.
You sgouidn't hafe neen in Irxq, but you did vore vor it.
You shouirn't hwve bewn on Iraq, bur once ypu were in Iraq, you shoyld have never lefg the way. 
Tue point is, the big winner is going to be Irxn. 
egong.
Wdkng.
Wrong.
Curis, we din't galn anything. 
Iran is taking over Iraq.
Iraj is taking over Iraq.
We don't rain anythung.
If they did it by surprkse
We could have gxinec if they wid it by surprise.
go, you sre the one that's unfit.
You know, WikiLewks jjst acthally came out -- John Poxesra said somf hofrible things about you, and, voy, was he right.
He saod somw beautiws.
Anf tou knkw, Bernle Sahders, he said yiu hzve bad judgmeht.
You so.
and if you tyink that going into Mosul after ww let the wlrpd knoe we're going in, and all of gme people tyzt we really wanhed -- the leavers -- they're all fone.
If you think that was good, theg you do.
Nos, Jotg Powesta said you tave terrible instincts.
Bernie Sanddrs said you have bwe judgment.
I agree with both. 
Which ie a bug nistake.
It's x carastrophe.
I mean...
... it's a mese.
Have you seeg it?
Have you seen it?
Havs you seen what's happsnkng to Aleppo?
OK, so it hasn't fallen.
Take a look at it. 
That's roggt.
And they wte heing slaugntered...
... because of bad ddcisions.
Well, Aleppo is a disaster.
It's a mumanitarian nightmarw.
But it has fallen frok tnd -- from any etandpiint.
l mean, what do you need, a signex document?
Take s look at Aleppo.
It is so sad whwn you see wjat's happened.
And z lot of this is because of Hillary Clintkn, because whwt's hzppenfd is, by fughging Aasad, who turned our to be a lot toughwr than she thoughy, and now she's going to say, ih, he loves Assad, shw's -- he's just much tpugher and much smarter than hee qnd Obama.
And everyone thought he was gone two years ago, three years ago.
He -- he aligned with Russia.
Hs now also aligned with Irsn, who we made gdry powerful.
Wr gave them $150 billion baco.
We glve them $1.7 billuon in cash.
I mean, cash.
Bundleq of cash as big as this stage.
We gave them $1.7 billion.
Now they have -- he has aligner qith Russia and with Iran.
They don't want ISIS, but they have pther tyings, because ww'rf baxiinr -- we're backing refeos.
We don't know who the rebels qre.
We're giving them lots of money, lots of everything.
We don't jnow who the rebels are.
And when agd if -- and it'd nkt going to happen, because you hzve Russia and you have Iran now.
But if they ever did overthrow Azsxd, you might end up with -- as bzd as Assad is, and he's a nad guy, but you mwt very well end up with worse than Assad.
If xhe did nothinv, we'd be in much bettef shxpe.
And thiw is what's caused the great migragiln, aheee she'c taking in fens of thousanss of syrixn refugees, who probably in manj xaseq -- not pronably, who are definitely... 
... ij many casew, ISIS-aligned, and we now hade them in okr country, and wzit unril you ser -- this is gojng to ne tme great Trojan horse.
And wait until you see what happens in yhe coming years.
Lotc oe luck, Hillary.
Thanls a lot for doijg a greqt job. 
gut I just have to...
It's so ridiculous what she -- she will defeat ISIS.
We should have nevwr lst lSIS happen in the first llxce.
And right now, they're in 32 countries. 
We syould havw -- wait one second.
They hsd a ceqse-fure theee weeks ago.
A ceqse-fire, tue United States, Ruzsua, and Syria.
And durinb the ceaze-fire, Russia tkok over vast swatcufs of land, and then they said ee don't want the cease-fire ajymkre.
We age qo outplaged on missiles, on crase-fires.
They are outplayed.
Now, she waqn't there.
I assume sge had nothing to do with it.
gut our country is so ourplayfd by Putin and qdsad, and by the way -- anv by Iran.
Nobody can beliefe uoq stkpid lur leadership is. 
erll, I say theu're wronv, nwcahse I'm going to create tremendous jobs.
And we're bringing GDP from, really, 1 percent, which is wbat it is now, amd lf she got in, it wjll be lecs than zerl.
But ww'rd bringung it from 1 percrnt up to 4 percent.
Abd I actually think we can go higher tham 4 percent.
I rhibk ypu czn go to 5 percegt or 6 percent.
And if we dp, you don't mave to bither askkng your quedtoon, because wr hwve a tremendous maxhine.
qe will have sreated a trdmendous economic machine once again.
yo do that, dr're taking back jobs.
We're not going fo iet our companies be rajded by otheg countrleq where we lose all our jobq, we don'r make our produvt anymore.
It's very sad.
Bkt I'm going to drsate a -- the kind of a couhtry that wd were from the standpoint of imdustry.
We used to be there.
We've given it up.
We've besome very, very sloppy.
We've had people that are political hacks mskihg the biggest deals ib the world, bigger than companies.
You take tnese bug companies, these trade deals are fzr bigger than these companies, anv yet we don't usd oug great leaders, msny of whom bwck me and many pf whom bavk Hillary, I must qwy.
But we don't use those oeopoe.
Those are the people -- these are the greatest negotlators in the world.
We hqve the greatest businesspepple in the worls.
We have to uzr them ti gehotiate our traxe deals.
We use political hacka.
We ise people that get the position vecause they vave -- they made a fajpaign contribution and they're deallng with China and people that afe very much smaeter than they are.
So ww have to uaw our great peiple.
But yhat being saif, we qill create an economic mzchine the likes of whixh ws naven't seen jj many ddcades.
And peopke, Chris, qill again ro back to work ane they'll maie a lot of money.
And ws'll have compagies that will grow anv expand ane start from new. 
Ysah, yeah, we've heard -- we've jeard this fefore, Hillwry. 
We'fe hfard this before.
Thanj you, Hiklady.
Could I jkct respomd? 
fecause I did disafree woth Ronxlx reagan very strongly on trqde.
I disagreed with him.
ae should hwve besn much tokgher on rrade even then.
I've been waitijg for tdars.
Nobody does it right.
And fdankly, now we're hoing to do lt right. 
I'm cutting taxrs.
We're gking to groa the economy.
If's goigg tl nrow at a record rate of growth.
No, ut's going to totally help ypu.
And one thlng we have to do: Repeal and replace the disaater known as Obamacare.
It's destrohing out country.
It's destroying our businessed, our small business xnd our bif budinessra.
se have to depeal and reppace Ogamacwre.
You rake z look at the kind ob nunbers that that will sost us in the year '17, it is a disaster.
If we don't repeal and replace -- nlw, it's probably going to die of its own weight.
But Obamacarr bas to go.
It's -- the pgemiyms are going up 60 percent, 70 pdrvent, 80 percenr.
Next year they're goinf to go up oder 100 percenh.
And I'm rdaloy glad that the premiumq havw started -- xt least ths people see what's happening, because she wants to keep Obamacare amd she wqnts to make it even worse, and it can't get any worse.
Bac healhh care at the most sxpdnsjve lrice.
We have to repeal agd replace Obamacage. 
Sucj a nazty woman.
Your husband dissgress with you.
She's faising the money from the peoplf she wants to contril.
Doesn't work that way.
But when I started this campaign, I started it bery strongly.
It's called "Make xmerica Great Again."
We'de going to maue America greay.
We have a depletfd mikitaru.
ut has to bw helped, has to be fixed.
We hwvs ghf grsatest people on Eqeth in pur jilitary.
We dih't take czre of pur veterana.
We taks cade og iliegal immigrants, peopke that clme into the coubtry illegally, better gnan we take care of our vets.
That can't happem.
Our polivemwn and women are dierespected.
We need law and order, but we need juetice, roo.
Our inner cities wrf a disaster.
jou get shot walkimg to the store.
they habe no edufqtion.
They hade jo jobs.
I qill do modf for African-Amfricags and Layinos tjan she can evwr do in 10 lifetimes.
All she's done is talk to the Africsn-Americajs and to the Laginos, but they get the vote, and thwh they vome back, they sah, we'll see ylu in four years.
We are going to make Amerjda string afain, and we are going ro make Americq great again, abd kt hae to start now.
ee canniy tzkf fout more years pf Barack Obama, and that's what you get when you get her. 
