Thank you, Lester.
Our jobs are fleeing the country.
They're going to Mexico.
They're going to many other countries.
You look at what China is doing to our country in terms of making our product.
They're devaluing their currency, and there's nobody in our government to fight them.
And we have a very good fight.
And we have a winning fight.
Because they're using our country as a piggy bank to rebuild China, and many other countries are doing the same thing.
So we're losing our good jobs, so many of them.
When you look at what's happening in Mexico, a friend of mine who builds plants said it's the eighth wonder of the world.
They're building some of the biggest plants anywhere in the world, some of the most sophisticated, some of the best plants.
With the United States, as he said, not so much.
So Ford is leaving.
You see that, their small car division leaving.
Thousands of jobs leaving Michigan, leaving Ohio.
They're all leaving.
And we can't allow it to happen anymore.
As far as child care is concerned and so many other things, I think Hillary and I agree on that.
We probably disagree a little bit as to numbers and amounts and what we're going to do, but perhaps we'll be talking about that later.
But we have to stop our jobs from being stolen from us.
We have to stop our companies from leaving the United States and, with it, firing all of their people.
All you have to do is take a look at Carrier air conditioning in Indianapolis.
They left -- fired 1,400 people.
They're going to Mexico.
So many hundreds and hundreds of companies are doing this.
We cannot let it happen.
Under my plan, I'll be reducing taxes tremendously, from 35 percent to 15 percent for companies, small and big businesses.
That's going to be a job creator like we haven't seen since Ronald Reagan.
It's going to be a beautiful thing to watch.
Companies will come.
They will build.
They will expand.
New companies will start.
And I look very, very much forward to doing it.
We have to renegotiate our trade deals, and we have to stop these countries from stealing our companies and our jobs.
Well, for one thing -- and before we start on that -- my father gave me a very small loan in 1975, and I built it into a company that's worth many, many billions of dollars, with some of the greatest assets in the world, and I say that only because that's the kind of thinking that our country needs.
Our country's in deep trouble.
We don't know what we're doing when it comes to devaluations and all of these countries all over the world, especially China.
They're the best, the best ever at it.
What they're doing to us is a very, very sad thing.
So we have to do that.
We have to renegotiate our trade deals.
And, Lester, they're taking our jobs, they're giving incentives, they're doing things that, frankly, we don't do.
Let me give you the example of Mexico.
They have a VAT tax.
We're on a different system.
When we sell into Mexico, there's a tax.
When they sell in -- automatic, 16 percent, approximately.
When they sell into us, there's no tax.
It's a defective agreement.
It's been defective for a long time, many years, but the politicians haven't done anything about it.
Now, in all fairness to Secretary Clinton -- yes, is that OK?
Good.
I want you to be very happy.
It's very important to me.
But in all fairness to Secretary Clinton, when she started talking about this, it was really very recently.
She's been doing this for 30 years.
And why hasn't she made the agreements better?
The NAFTA agreement is defective.
Just because of the tax and many other reasons, but just because of the fact...
Secretary Clinton and others, politicians, should have been doing this for years, not right now, because of the fact that we've created a movement.
They should have been doing this for years.
What's happened to our jobs and our country and our economy generally is -- look, we owe $20 trillion.
We cannot do it any longer, Lester.
Well, the first thing you do is don't let the jobs leave.
The companies are leaving.
I could name, I mean, there are thousands of them.
They're leaving, and they're leaving in bigger numbers than ever.
And what you do is you say, fine, you want to go to Mexico or some other country, good luck.
We wish you a lot of luck.
But if you think you're going to make your air conditioners or your cars or your cookies or whatever you make and bring them into our country without a tax, you're wrong.
And once you say you're going to have to tax them coming in, and our politicians never do this, because they have special interests and the special interests want those companies to leave, because in many cases, they own the companies.
So what I'm saying is, we can stop them from leaving.
We have to stop them from leaving.
And that's a big, big factor.
That's called business, by the way.
I did not.
I did not.
I do not say that.
I do not say that.
She talks about solar panels.
We invested in a solar company, our country.
That was a disaster.
They lost plenty of money on that one.
Now, look, I'm a great believer in all forms of energy, but we're putting a lot of people out of work.
Our energy policies are a disaster.
Our country is losing so much in terms of energy, in terms of paying off our debt.
You can't do what you're looking to do with $20 trillion in debt.
The Obama administration, from the time they've come in, is over 230 years' worth of debt, and he's topped it.
He's doubled it in a course of almost eight years, seven-and-a-half years, to be semi- exact.
So I will tell you this.
We have to do a much better job at keeping our jobs.
And we have to do a much better job at giving companies incentives to build new companies or to expand, because they're not doing it.
And all you have to do is look at Michigan and look at Ohio and look at all of these places where so many of their jobs and their companies are just leaving, they're gone.
And, Hillary, I'd just ask you this.
You've been doing this for 30 years.
Why are you just thinking about these solutions right now?
For 30 years, you've been doing it, and now you're just starting to think of solutions.
I will bring -- excuse me.
I will bring back jobs.
You can't bring back jobs.
Yeah, for 30 years.
Well, he approved NAFTA...
He approved NAFTA, which is the single worst trade deal ever approved in this country.
But you haven't done it in 30 years or 26 years or any number you want to...
You haven't done it.
You haven't done it.
Excuse me.
Your husband signed NAFTA, which was one of the worst things that ever happened to the manufacturing industry.
You go to New England, you go to Ohio, Pennsylvania, you go anywhere you want, Secretary Clinton, and you will see devastation where manufacture is down 30, 40, sometimes 50 percent.
NAFTA is the worst trade deal maybe ever signed anywhere, but certainly ever signed in this country.
And now you want to approve Trans-Pacific Partnership.
You were totally in favor of it.
Then you heard what I was saying, how bad it is, and you said, I can't win that debate.
But you know that if you did win, you would approve that, and that will be almost as bad as NAFTA.
Nothing will ever top NAFTA.
You called it the gold standard.
You called it the gold standard of trade deals.
You said it's the finest deal you've ever seen.
And then you heard what I said about it, and all of a sudden you were against it.
Not.
So is it President Obama's fault?
Is it President Obama's fault?
Secretary, is it President Obama's fault?
Because he's pushing it.
But you have no plan.
Secretary, you have no plan.
That's about all you've...
You are going to approve one of the biggest tax cuts in history.
You are going to approve one of the biggest tax increases in history.
You are going to drive business out.
Your regulations are a disaster, and you're going to increase regulations all over the place.
And by the way, my tax cut is the biggest since Ronald Reagan.
I'm very proud of it.
It will create tremendous numbers of new jobs.
But regulations, you are going to regulate these businesses out of existence.
When I go around -- Lester, I tell you this, I've been all over.
And when I go around, despite the tax cut, the thing -- the things that business as in people like the most is the fact that I'm cutting regulation.
You have regulations on top of regulations, and new companies cannot form and old companies are going out of business.
And you want to increase the regulations and make them even worse.
I'm going to cut regulations.
I'm going to cut taxes big league, and you're going to raise taxes big league, end of story.
Facts.
And take a look at mine, also, and you'll see.
Well, could I just finish -- I think I...
I think I should -- you go to her website, and you take a look at her website.
She's going to raise taxes $1.3 trillion.
And look at her website.
You know what?
It's no difference than this.
She's telling us how to fight ISIS.
Just go to her website.
She tells you how to fight ISIS on her website.
I don't think General Douglas MacArthur would like that too much.
No, no, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do.
See, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do.
No wonder you've been fighting -- no wonder you've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life.
Well, I'm really calling for major jobs, because the wealthy are going create tremendous jobs.
They're going to expand their companies.
They're going to do a tremendous job.
I'm getting rid of the carried interest provision.
And if you really look, it's not a tax -- it's really not a great thing for the wealthy.
It's a great thing for the middle class.
It's a great thing for companies to expand.
And when these people are going to put billions and billions of dollars into companies, and when they're going to bring $2.5 trillion back from overseas, where they can't bring the money back, because politicians like Secretary Clinton won't allow them to bring the money back, because the taxes are so onerous, and the bureaucratic red tape, so what -- is so bad.
So what they're doing is they're leaving our country, and they're, believe it or not, leaving because taxes are too high and because some of them have lots of money outside of our country.
And instead of bringing it back and putting the money to work, because they can't work out a deal to -- and everybody agrees it should be brought back.
Instead of that, they're leaving our country to get their money, because they can't bring their money back into our country, because of bureaucratic red tape, because they can't get together.
Because we have -- we have a president that can't sit them around a table and get them to approve something.
And here's the thing.
Republicans and Democrats agree that this should be done, $2.5 trillion.
I happen to think it's double that.
It's probably $5 trillion that we can't bring into our country, Lester.
And with a little leadership, you'd get it in here very quickly, and it could be put to use on the inner cities and lots of other things, and it would be beautiful.
But we have no leadership.
And honestly, that starts with Secretary Clinton.
Why not?
There's nothing crazy about not letting our companies bring their money back into their country.
Yes.
Then you didn't read it.
Who gave it that name?
The first I've -- who gave it that name?
How much?
How much for my family?
Lester, how much?
Typical politician.
All talk, no action.
Sounds good, doesn't work.
Never going to happen.
Our country is suffering because people like Secretary Clinton have made such bad decisions in terms of our jobs and in terms of what's going on.
Now, look, we have the worst revival of an economy since the Great Depression.
And believe me: We're in a bubble right now.
And the only thing that looks good is the stock market, but if you raise interest rates even a little bit, that's going to come crashing down.
We are in a big, fat, ugly bubble.
And we better be awfully careful.
And we have a Fed that's doing political things.
This Janet Yellen of the Fed.
The Fed is doing political -- by keeping the interest rates at this level.
And believe me: The day Obama goes off, and he leaves, and goes out to the golf course for the rest of his life to play golf, when they raise interest rates, you're going to see some very bad things happen, because the Fed is not doing their job.
The Fed is being more political than Secretary Clinton.
I don't mind releasing -- I'm under a routine audit.
And it'll be released.
And -- as soon as the audit's finished, it will be released.
But you will learn more about Donald Trump by going down to the federal elections, where I filed a 104-page essentially financial statement of sorts, the forms that they have.
It shows income -- in fact, the income -- I just looked today -- the income is filed at $694 million for this past year, $694 million.
If you would have told me I was going to make that 15 or 20 years ago, I would have been very surprised.
But that's the kind of thinking that our country needs.
When we have a country that's doing so badly, that's being ripped off by every single country in the world, it's the kind of thinking that our country needs, because everybody -- Lester, we have a trade deficit with all of the countries that we do business with, of almost $800 billion a year.
You know what that is?
That means, who's negotiating these trade deals?
We have people that are political hacks negotiating our trade deals.
Excuse me.
Well, I told you, I will release them as soon as the audit.
Look, I've been under audit almost for 15 years.
I know a lot of wealthy people that have never been audited.
I said, do you get audited?
I get audited almost every year.
And in a way, I should be complaining.
I'm not even complaining.
I don't mind it.
It's almost become a way of life.
I get audited by the IRS.
But other people don't.
I will say this.
We have a situation in this country that has to be taken care of.
I will release my tax returns -- against my lawyer's wishes -- when she releases her 33,000 e-mails that have been deleted.
As soon as she releases them, I will release.
I will release my tax returns.
And that's against -- my lawyers, they say, "Don't do it."
I will tell you this.
No -- in fact, watching shows, they're reading the papers.
Almost every lawyer says, you don't release your returns until the audit's complete.
When the audit's complete, I'll do it.
But I would go against them if she releases her e-mails.
It's not negotiable, no.
Let her release the e-mails.
Why did she delete 33,000...
That makes me smart.
That was more than a mistake.
That was done purposely.
OK?
That was not a mistake.
That was done purposely.
When you have your staff taking the Fifth Amendment, taking the Fifth so they're not prosecuted, when you have the man that set up the illegal server taking the Fifth, I think it's disgraceful.
And believe me, this country thinks it's -- really thinks it's disgraceful, also.
As far as my tax returns, you don't learn that much from tax returns.
That I can tell you.
You learn a lot from financial disclosure.
And you should go down and take a look at that.
The other thing, I'm extremely underleveraged.
The report that said $650 -- which, by the way, a lot of friends of mine that know my business say, boy, that's really not a lot of money.
It's not a lot of money relative to what I had.
The buildings that were in question, they said in the same report, which was -- actually, it wasn't even a bad story, to be honest with you, but the buildings are worth $3.9 billion.
And the $650 isn't even on that.
But it's not $650.
It's much less than that.
But I could give you a list of banks, I would -- if that would help you, I would give you a list of banks.
These are very fine institutions, very fine banks.
I could do that very quickly.
I am very underleveraged.
I have a great company.
I have a tremendous income.
And the reason I say that is not in a braggadocios way.
It's because it's about time that this country had somebody running it that has an idea about money.
When we have $20 trillion in debt, and our country's a mess, you know, it's one thing to have $20 trillion in debt and our roads are good and our bridges are good and everything's in great shape, our airports.
Our airports are like from a third world country.
You land at LaGuardia, you land at Kennedy, you land at LAX, you land at Newark, and you come in from Dubai and Qatar and you see these incredible -- you come in from China, you see these incredible airports, and you land -- we've become a third world country.
So the worst of all things has happened.
We owe $20 trillion, and we're a mess.
We haven't even started.
And we've spent $6 trillion in the Middle East, according to a report that I just saw.
Whether it's 6 or 5, but it looks like it's 6, $6 trillion in the Middle East, we could have rebuilt our country twice.
And it's really a shame.
And it's politicians like Secretary Clinton that have caused this problem.
Our country has tremendous problems.
We're a debtor nation.
We're a serious debtor nation.
And we have a country that needs new roads, new tunnels, new bridges, new airports, new schools, new hospitals.
And we don't have the money, because it's been squandered on so many of your ideas.
It would be squandered, too, believe me.
Maybe he didn't do a good job and I was unsatisfied with his work...
Which our country should do, too.
Wrong.
Wrong.
So, yeah, I think -- I do think it's time.
Look, it's all words, it's all sound bites.
I built an unbelievable company.
Some of the greatest assets anywhere in the world, real estate assets anywhere in the world, beyond the United States, in Europe, lots of different places.
It's an unbelievable company.
But on occasion, four times, we used certain laws that are there.
And when Secretary Clinton talks about people that didn't get paid, first of all, they did get paid a lot, but taken advantage of the laws of the nation.
Now, if you want to change the laws, you've been there a long time, change the laws.
But I take advantage of the laws of the nation because I'm running a company.
My obligation right now is to do well for myself, my family, my employees, for my companies.
And that's what I do.
But what she doesn't say is that tens of thousands of people that are unbelievably happy and that love me.
I'll give you an example.
We're just opening up on Pennsylvania Avenue right next to the White House, so if I don't get there one way, I'm going to get to Pennsylvania Avenue another.
But we're opening the Old Post Office.
Under budget, ahead of schedule, saved tremendous money.
I'm a year ahead of schedule.
And that's what this country should be doing.
We build roads and they cost two and three and four times what they're supposed to cost.
We buy products for our military and they come in at costs that are so far above what they were supposed to be, because we don't have people that know what they're doing.
When we look at the budget, the budget is bad to a large extent because we have people that have no idea as to what to do and how to buy.
The Trump International is way under budget and way ahead of schedule.
And we should be able to do that for our country.
Well, first of all, Secretary Clinton doesn't want to use a couple of words, and that's law and order.
And we need law and order.
If we don't have it, we're not going to have a country.
And when I look at what's going on in Charlotte, a city I love, a city where I have investments, when I look at what's going on throughout various parts of our country, whether it's -- I mean, I can just keep naming them all day long -- we need law and order in our country.
I just got today the, as you know, the endorsement of the Fraternal Order of Police, we just -- just came in.
We have endorsements from, I think, almost every police group, very -- I mean, a large percentage of them in the United States.
We have a situation where we have our inner cities, African- Americans, Hispanics are living in he'll because it's so dangerous.
You walk down the street, you get shot.
In Chicago, they've had thousands of shootings, thousands since January 1st.
Thousands of shootings.
And I'm saying, where is this?
Is this a war-torn country?
What are we doing?
And we have to stop the violence.
We have to bring back law and order.
In a place like Chicago, where thousands of people have been killed, thousands over the last number of years, in fact, almost 4,000 have been killed since Barack Obama became president, over -- almost 4,000 people in Chicago have been killed.
We have to bring back law and order.
Now, whether or not in a place like Chicago you do stop and frisk, which worked very well, Mayor Giuliani is here, worked very well in New York.
It brought the crime rate way down.
But you take the gun away from criminals that shouldn't be having it.
We have gangs roaming the street.
And in many cases, they're illegally here, illegal immigrants.
And they have guns.
And they shoot people.
And we have to be very strong.
And we have to be very vigilant.
We have to be -- we have to know what we're doing.
Right now, our police, in many cases, are afraid to do anything.
We have to protect our inner cities, because African-American communities are being decimated by crime, decimated.
No, you're wrong.
It went before a judge, who was a very against-police judge.
It was taken away from her.
And our mayor, our new mayor, refused to go forward with the case.
They would have won an appeal.
If you look at it, throughout the country, there are many places where it's allowed.
No, the argument is that we have to take the guns away from these people that have them and they are bad people that shouldn't have them.
These are felons.
These are people that are bad people that shouldn't be -- when you have 3,000 shootings in Chicago from January 1st, when you have 4,000 people killed in Chicago by guns, from the beginning of the presidency of Barack Obama, his hometown, you have to have stop-and-frisk.
You need more police.
You need a better community, you know, relation.
You don't have good community relations in Chicago.
It's terrible.
I have property there.
It's terrible what's going on in Chicago.
But when you look -- and Chicago's not the only -- you go to Ferguson, you go to so many different places.
You need better relationships.
I agree with Secretary Clinton on this.
You need better relationships between the communities and the police, because in some cases, it's not good.
But you look at Dallas, where the relationships were really studied, the relationships were really a beautiful thing, and then five police officers were killed one night very violently.
So there's some bad things going on.
Some really bad things.
But we need -- Lester, we need law and order.
And we need law and order in the inner cities, because the people that are most affected by what's happening are African-American and Hispanic people.
And it's very unfair to them what our politicians are allowing to happen.
Ugh.
I'd like to respond to that.
First of all, I agree, and a lot of people even within my own party want to give certain rights to people on watch lists and no- fly lists.
I agree with you.
When a person is on a watch list or a no-fly list, and I have the endorsement of the NRA, which I'm very proud of.
These are very, very good people, and they're protecting the Second Amendment.
But I think we have to look very strongly at no-fly lists and watch lists.
And when people are on there, even if they shouldn't be on there, we'll help them, we'll help them legally, we'll help them get off.
But I tend to agree with that quite strongly.
I do want to bring up the fact that you were the one that brought up the words super-predator about young black youth.
And that's a term that I think was a -- it's -- it's been horribly met, as you know.
I think you've apologized for it.
But I think it was a terrible thing to say.
And when it comes to stop-and-frisk, you know, you're talking about takes guns away.
Well, I'm talking about taking guns away from gangs and people that use them.
And I don't think -- I really don't think you disagree with me on this, if you want to know the truth.
I think maybe there's a political reason why you can't say it, but I really don't believe -- in New York City, stop-and-frisk, we had 2,200 murders, and stop-and-frisk brought it down to 500 murders.
Five hundred murders is a lot of murders.
It's hard to believe, 500 is like supposed to be good?
But we went from 2,200 to 500.
And it was continued on by Mayor Bloomberg.
And it was terminated by current mayor.
But stop-and- frisk had a tremendous impact on the safety of New York City.
Tremendous beyond belief.
So when you say it has no impact, it really did.
It had a very, very big impact.
No, you're wrong.
You're wrong.
Murders are up.
All right.
You check it.
I'd like to just respond, if I might.
I'd just like to respond.
I will.
Look, the African-American community has been let down by our politicians.
They talk good around election time, like right now, and after the election, they said, see ya later, I'll see you in four years.
The African-American community -- because -- look, the community within the inner cities has been so badly treated.
They've been abused and used in order to get votes by Democrat politicians, because that's what it is.
They've controlled these communities for up to 100 years.
And I will tell you, you look at the inner cities -- and I just left Detroit, and I just left Philadelphia, and I just -- you know, you've seen me, I've been all over the place.
You decided to stay home, and that's OK.
But I will tell you, I've been all over.
And I've met some of the greatest people I'll ever meet within these communities.
And they are very, very upset with what their politicians have told them and what their politicians have done.
I'll tell you very -- well, just very simple to say.
Sidney Blumenthal works for the campaign and close -- very close friend of Secretary Clinton.
And her campaign manager, Patti Doyle, went to -- during the campaign, her campaign against President Obama, fought very hard.
And you can go look it up, and you can check it out.
And if you look at CNN this past week, Patti Solis Doyle was on Wolf Blitzer saying that this happened.
Blumenthal sent McClatchy, highly respected reporter at McClatchy, to Kenya to find out about it.
They were pressing it very hard.
She failed to get the birth certificate.
When I got involved, I didn't fail.
I got him to give the birth certificate.
So I'm satisfied with it.
And I'll tell you why I'm satisfied with it.
Because I want to get on to defeating ISIS, because I want to get on to creating jobs, because I want to get on to having a strong border, because I want to get on to things that are very important to me and that are very important to the country.
Yeah.
Well, nobody was pressing it, nobody was caring much about it.
I figured you'd ask the question tonight, of course.
But nobody was caring much about it.
But I was the one that got him to produce the birth certificate.
And I think I did a good job.
Secretary Clinton also fought it.
I mean, you know -- now, everybody in mainstream is going to say, oh, that's not true.
Look, it's true.
Sidney Blumenthal sent a reporter -- you just have to take a look at CNN, the last week, the interview with your former campaign manager.
And she was involved.
But just like she can't bring back jobs, she can't produce.
Well, it was very -- I say nothing.
I say nothing, because I was able to get him to produce it.
He should have produced it a long time before.
I say nothing.
But let me just tell you.
When you talk about healing, I think that I've developed very, very good relationships over the last little while with the African-American community.
I think you can see that.
And I feel that they really wanted me to come to that conclusion.
And I think I did a great job and a great service not only for the country, but even for the president, in getting him to produce his birth certificate.
I would love to respond.
First of all, I got to watch in preparing for this some of your debates against Barack Obama.
You treated him with terrible disrespect.
And I watched the way you talk now about how lovely everything is and how wonderful you are.
It doesn't work that way.
You were after him, you were trying to -- you even sent out or your campaign sent out pictures of him in a certain garb, very famous pictures.
I don't think you can deny that.
But just last week, your campaign manager said it was true.
So when you tried to act holier than thou, it really doesn't work.
It really doesn't.
Now, as far as the lawsuit, yes, when I was very young, I went into my father's company, had a real estate company in Brooklyn and Queens, and we, along with many, many other companies throughout the country -- it was a federal lawsuit -- were sued.
We settled the suit with zero -- with no admission of guilt.
It was very easy to do.
I notice you bring that up a lot.
And, you know, I also notice the very nasty commercials that you do on me in so many different ways, which I don't do on you.
Maybe I'm trying to save the money.
But, frankly, I look -- I look at that, and I say, isn't that amazing?
Because I settled that lawsuit with no admission of guilt, but that was a lawsuit brought against many real estate firms, and it's just one of those things.
I'll go one step further.
In Palm Beach, Florida, tough community, a brilliant community, a wealthy community, probably the wealthiest community there is in the world, I opened a club, and really got great credit for it.
No discrimination against African- Americans, against Muslims, against anybody.
And it's a tremendously successful club.
And I'm so glad I did it.
And I have been given great credit for what I did.
And I'm very, very proud of it.
And that's the way I feel.
That is the true way I feel.
I do want to say that I was just endorsed -- and more are coming next week -- it will be over 200 admirals, many of them here -- admirals and generals endorsed me to lead this country.
That just happened, and many more are coming.
And I'm very proud of it.
In addition, I was just endorsed by ICE.
They've never endorsed anybody before on immigration.
I was just endorsed by ICE.
I was just recently endorsed -- 16,500 Border Patrol agents.
So when Secretary Clinton talks about this, I mean, I'll take the admirals and I'll take the generals any day over the political hacks that I see that have led our country so brilliantly over the last 10 years with their knowledge.
OK?
Because look at the mess that we're in.
Look at the mess that we're in.
As far as the cyber, I agree to parts of what Secretary Clinton said.
We should be better than anybody else, and perhaps we're not.
I don't think anybody knows it was Russia that broke into the DNC.
She's saying Russia, Russia, Russia, but I don't -- maybe it was.
I mean, it could be Russia, but it could also be China.
It could also be lots of other people.
It also could be somebody sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds, OK?
You don't know who broke in to DNC.
But what did we learn with DNC?
We learned that Bernie Sanders was taken advantage of by your people, by Debbie Wasserman Schultz.
Look what happened to her.
But Bernie Sanders was taken advantage of.
That's what we learned.
Now, whether that was Russia, whether that was China, whether it was another country, we don't know, because the truth is, under President Obama we've lost control of things that we used to have control over.
We came in with the Internet, we came up with the Internet, and I think Secretary Clinton and myself would agree very much, when you look at what ISIS is doing with the Internet, they're beating us at our own game.
ISIS.
So we have to get very, very tough on cyber and cyber warfare.
It is -- it is a huge problem.
I have a son.
He's 10 years old.
He has computers.
He is so good with these computers, it's unbelievable.
The security aspect of cyber is very, very tough.
And maybe it's hardly doable.
But I will say, we are not doing the job we should be doing.
But that's true throughout our whole governmental society.
We have so many things that we have to do better, Lester, and certainly cyber is one of them.
Well, first I have to say one thing, very important.
Secretary Clinton is talking about taking out ISIS.
"We will take out ISIS."
Well, President Obama and Secretary Clinton created a vacuum the way they got out of Iraq, because they got out -- what, they shouldn't have been in, but once they got in, the way they got out was a disaster.
And ISIS was formed.
So she talks about taking them out.
She's been doing it a long time.
She's been trying to take them out for a long time.
But they wouldn't have even been formed if they left some troops behind, like 10,000 or maybe something more than that.
And then you wouldn't have had them.
Or, as I've been saying for a long time, and I think you'll agree, because I said it to you once, had we taken the oil -- and we should have taken the oil -- ISIS would not have been able to form either, because the oil was their primary source of income.
And now they have the oil all over the place, including the oil -- a lot of the oil in Libya, which was another one of her disasters.
Wrong.
Wrong.
Wrong.
Well, I have to respond.
The secretary said very strongly about working with -- we've been working with them for many years, and we have the greatest mess anyone's ever seen.
You look at the Middle East, it's a total mess.
Under your direction, to a large extent.
But you look at the Middle East, you started the Iran deal, that's another beauty where you have a country that was ready to fall, I mean, they were doing so badly.
They were choking on the sanctions.
And now they're going to be actually probably a major power at some point pretty soon, the way they're going.
But when you look at NATO, I was asked on a major show, what do you think of NATO?
And you have to understand, I'm a businessperson.
I did really well.
But I have common sense.
And I said, well, I'll tell you.
I haven't given lots of thought to NATO.
But two things.
Number one, the 28 countries of NATO, many of them aren't paying their fair share.
Number two -- and that bothers me, because we should be asking -- we're defending them, and they should at least be paying us what they're supposed to be paying by treaty and contract.
And, number two, I said, and very strongly, NATO could be obsolete, because -- and I was very strong on this, and it was actually covered very accurately in the New York Times, which is unusual for the New York Times, to be honest -- but I said, they do not focus on terror.
And I was very strong.
And I said it numerous times.
And about four months ago, I read on the front page of the Wall Street Journal that NATO is opening up a major terror division.
And I think that's great.
And I think we should get -- because we pay approximately 73 percent of the cost of NATO.
It's a lot of money to protect other people.
But I'm all for NATO.
But I said they have to focus on terror, also.
And they're going to do that.
And that was -- believe me -- I'm sure I'm not going to get credit for it -- but that was largely because of what I was saying and my criticism of NATO.
I think we have to get NATO to go into the Middle East with us, in addition to surrounding nations, and we have to knock the hell out of ISIS, and we have to do it fast, when ISIS formed in this vacuum created by Barack Obama and Secretary Clinton.
And believe me, you were the ones that took out the troops.
Not only that, you named the day.
They couldn't believe it.
They sat back probably and said, I can't believe it.
They said...
No, wait a minute.
When they formed, when they formed, this is something that never should have happened.
It should have never happened.
Now, you're talking about taking out ISIS.
But you were there, and you were secretary of state when it was a little infant.
Now it's in over 30 countries.
And you're going to stop them?
I don't think so.
I did not support the war in Iraq.
That is a mainstream media nonsense put out by her, because she -- frankly, I think the best person in her campaign is mainstream media.
Just -- would you like to hear...
Wait a minute.
I was against the war in Iraq.
Just so you put it out.
The record does not show that.
The record shows that I'm right.
When I did an interview with Howard Stern, very lightly, first time anyone's asked me that, I said, very lightly, I don't know, maybe, who knows?
Essentially.
I then did an interview with Neil Cavuto.
We talked about the economy is more important.
I then spoke to Sean Hannity, which everybody refuses to call Sean Hannity.
I had numerous conversations with Sean Hannity at Fox.
And Sean Hannity said -- and he called me the other day -- and I spoke to him about it -- he said you were totally against the war, because he was for the war.
And when he -- excuse me.
And that was before the war started.
Sean Hannity said very strongly to me and other people -- he's willing to say it, but nobody wants to call him.
I was against the war.
He said, you used to have fights with me, because Sean was in favor of the war.
And I understand that side, also, not very much, because we should have never been there.
But nobody called Sean Hannity.
And then they did an article in a major magazine, shortly after the war started.
I think in '04.
But they did an article which had me totally against the war in Iraq.
And one of your compatriots said, you know, whether it was before or right after, Trump was definitely -- because if you read this article, there's no doubt.
But if somebody -- and I'll ask the press -- if somebody would call up Sean Hannity, this was before the war started.
He and I used to have arguments about the war.
I said, it's a terrible and a stupid thing.
It's going to destabilize the Middle East.
And that's exactly what it's done.
It's been a disaster.
No, no.
You didn't hear what I said.
Well, I have much better judgment than she does.
There's no question about that.
I also have a much better temperament than she has, you know?
I have a much better -- she spent -- let me tell you -- she spent hundreds of millions of dollars on an advertising -- you know, they get Madison Avenue into a room, they put names -- oh, temperament, let's go after -- I think my strongest asset, maybe by far, is my temperament.
I have a winning temperament.
I know how to win.
She does not have a...
Wait.
The AFL-CIO the other day, behind the blue screen, I don't know who you were talking to, Secretary Clinton, but you were totally out of control.
I said, there's a person with a temperament that's got a problem.
That would not start a war.
No, they were taunting us.
Wrong.
It's lies.
That line's getting a little bit old, I must say.
I would like to...
It's not an accurate one at all.
It's not an accurate one.
So I just want to give a lot of things -- and just to respond.
I agree with her on one thing.
The single greatest problem the world has is nuclear armament, nuclear weapons, not global warming, like you think and your -- your president thinks.
Nuclear is the single greatest threat.
Just to go down the list, we defend Japan, we defend Germany, we defend South Korea, we defend Saudi Arabia, we defend countries.
They do not pay us.
But they should be paying us, because we are providing tremendous service and we're losing a fortune.
That's why we're losing -- we're losing -- we lose on everything.
I say, who makes these -- we lose on everything.
All I said, that it's very possible that if they don't pay a fair share, because this isn't 40 years ago where we could do what we're doing.
We can't defend Japan, a behemoth, selling us cars by the million...
Well, wait, but it's very important.
All I said was, they may have to defend themselves or they have to help us out.
We're a country that owes $20 trillion.
They have to help us out.
As far as the nuclear is concerned, I agree.
It is the single greatest threat that this country has.
Well, I have to say that, you know, for what Secretary Clinton was saying about nuclear with Russia, she's very cavalier in the way she talks about various countries.
But Russia has been expanding their -- they have a much newer capability than we do.
We have not been updating from the new standpoint.
I looked the other night.
I was seeing B-52s, they're old enough that your father, your grandfather could be flying them.
We are not -- we are not keeping up with other countries.
I would like everybody to end it, just get rid of it.
But I would certainly not do first strike.
I think that once the nuclear alternative happens, it's over.
At the same time, we have to be prepared.
I can't take anything off the table.
Because you look at some of these countries, you look at North Korea, we're doing nothing there.
China should solve that problem for us.
China should go into North Korea.
China is totally powerful as it relates to North Korea.
And by the way, another one powerful is the worst deal I think I've ever seen negotiated that you started is the Iran deal.
Iran is one of their biggest trading partners.
Iran has power over North Korea.
And when they made that horrible deal with Iran, they should have included the fact that they do something with respect to North Korea.
And they should have done something with respect to Yemen and all these other places.
And when asked to Secretary Kerry, why didn't you do that?
Why didn't you add other things into the deal?
One of the great giveaways of all time, of all time, including $400 million in cash.
Nobody's ever seen that before.
That turned out to be wrong.
It was actually $1.7 billion in cash, obviously, I guess for the hostages.
It certainly looks that way.
So you say to yourself, why didn't they make the right deal?
This is one of the worst deals ever made by any country in history.
The deal with Iran will lead to nuclear problems.
All they have to do is sit back 10 years, and they don't have to do much.
And they're going to end up getting nuclear.
I met with Bibi Netanyahu the other day.
Believe me, he's not a happy camper.
Lester, one thing I'd like to say.
I will go very quickly.
But I will tell you that Hillary will tell you to go to her website and read all about how to defeat ISIS, which she could have defeated by never having it, you know, get going in the first place.
Right now, it's getting tougher and tougher to defeat them, because they're in more and more places, more and more states, more and more nations.
And it's a big problem.
And as far as Japan is concerned, I want to help all of our allies, but we are losing billions and billions of dollars.
We cannot be the policemen of the world.
We cannot protect countries all over the world...
... where they're not paying us what we need.
And she doesn't say that, because she's got no business ability.
We need heart.
We need a lot of things.
But you have to have some basic ability.
And sadly, she doesn't have that.
All of the things that she's talking about could have been taken care of during the last 10 years, let's say, while she had great power.
But they weren't taken care of.
And if she ever wins this race, they won't be taken care of.
She doesn't have the look.
She doesn't have the stamina.
I said she doesn't have the stamina.
And I don't believe she does have the stamina.
To be president of this country, you need tremendous stamina.
You have -- wait a minute.
Wait a minute, Lester.
You asked me a question.
Did you ask me a question?
You have to be able to negotiate our trade deals.
You have to be able to negotiate, that's right, with Japan, with Saudi Arabia.
I mean, can you imagine, we're defending Saudi Arabia?
And with all of the money they have, we're defending them, and they're not paying?
All you have to do is speak to them.
Wait.
You have so many different things you have to be able to do, and I don't believe that Hillary has the stamina.
The world -- let me tell you.
Let me tell you.
Hillary has experience, but it's bad experience.
We have made so many bad deals during the last -- so she's got experience, that I agree.
But it's bad, bad experience.
Whether it's the Iran deal that you're so in love with, where we gave them $150 billion back, whether it's the Iran deal, whether it's anything you can -- name -- you almost can't name a good deal.
I agree.
She's got experience, but it's bad experience.
And this country can't afford to have another four years of that kind of experience.
I never said that.
I didn't say that.
Where did you find this?
Where did you find this?
Where did you find this?
Oh, really?
OK, good.
Let me just tell you...
You know, Hillary is hitting me with tremendous commercials.
Some of it's said in entertainment.
Some of it's said -- somebody who's been very vicious to me, Rosie O'Donnell, I said very tough things to her, and I think everybody would agree that she deserves it and nobody feels sorry for her.
But you want to know the truth?
I was going to say something...
... extremely rough to Hillary, to her family, and I said to myself, "I can't do it.
I just can't do it.
It's inappropriate.
It's not nice."
But she spent hundreds of millions of dollars on negative ads on me, many of which are absolutely untrue.
They're untrue.
And they're misrepresentations.
And I will tell you this, Lester: It's not nice.
And I don't deserve that.
But it's certainly not a nice thing that she's done.
It's hundreds of millions of ads.
And the only gratifying thing is, I saw the polls come in today, and with all of that money...
... $200 million is spent, and I'm either winning or tied, and I've spent practically nothing.
The other day, we were deporting 800 people.
And perhaps they passed the wrong button, they pressed the wrong button, or perhaps worse than that, it was corruption, but these people that we were going to deport for good reason ended up becoming citizens.
Ended up becoming citizens.
And it was 800.
And now it turns out it might be 1,800, and they don't even know.
Look, here's the story.
I want to make America great again.
I'm going to be able to do it.
I don't believe Hillary will.
The answer is, if she wins, I will absolutely support her.
Well, I actually agree with that.
I agree with everything she said.
I began this campaign because I was so tired of seeing such foolish things happen to our country.
This is a great country.
This is a great land.
I've gotten to know the people of the country over the last year-and-a-half that I've been doing this as a politician.
I cannot believe I'm saying that about myself, but I guess I have been a politician. 
And my whole concept was to make America great again.
When I watch the deals being made, when I watch what's happening with some horrible things like Obamacare, where your health insurance and health care is going up by numbers that are astronomical, 68 percent, 59 percent, 71 percent, when I look at the Iran deal and how bad a deal it is for us, it's a one-sided transaction where we're giving back $150 billion to a terrorist state, really, the number one terror state, we've made them a strong country from really a very weak country just three years ago.
When I look at all of the things that I see and all of the potential that our country has, we have such tremendous potential, whether it's in business and trade, where we're doing so badly.
Last year, we had almost $800 billion trade deficit.
In other words, trading with other countries.
We had an $800 billion deficit.
It's hard to believe.
Inconceivable.
You say who's making these deals?
We're going the make great deals.
We're going to have a strong border.
We're going to bring back law and order.
Just today, policemen was shot, two killed.
And this is happening on a weekly basis.
We have to bring back respect to law enforcement.
At the same time, we have to take care of people on all sides.
We need justice.
But I want to do things that haven't been done, including fixing and making our inner cities better for the African-American citizens that are so great, and for the Latinos, Hispanics, and I look forward to doing it.
It's called make America great again. 
No, I didn't say that at all.
I don't think you understood what was -- this was locker room talk.
I'm not proud of it.
I apologize to my family.
I apologize to the American people.
Certainly I'm not proud of it.
But this is locker room talk.
You know, when we have a world where you have ISIS chopping off heads, where you have -- and, frankly, drowning people in steel cages, where you have wars and horrible, horrible sights all over, where you have so many bad things happening, this is like medieval times.
We haven't seen anything like this, the carnage all over the world.
And they look and they see.
Can you imagine the people that are, frankly, doing so well against us with ISIS?
And they look at our country and they see what's going on.
Yes, I'm very embarrassed by it.
I hate it.
But it's locker room talk, and it's one of those things.
I will knock the hell out of ISIS.
We're going to defeat ISIS.
ISIS happened a number of years ago in a vacuum that was left because of bad judgment.
And I will tell you, I will take care of ISIS. 
And we should get on to much more important things and much bigger things.
I have great respect for women.
Nobody has more respect for women than I do.
I've said things that, frankly, you hear these things I said.
And I was embarrassed by it.
But I have tremendous respect for women. 
And women have respect for me.
And I will tell you: No, I have not.
And I will tell you that I'm going to make our country safe.
We're going to have borders in our country, which we don't have now.
People are pouring into our country, and they're coming in from the Middle East and other places.
We're going to make America safe again.
We're going to make America great again, but we're going to make America safe again.
And we're going to make America wealthy again, because if you don't do that, it just -- it sounds harsh to say, but we have to build up the wealth of our nation. 
Right now, other nations are taking our jobs and they're taking our wealth. 
And that's what I want to talk about.
Am I allowed to respond to that?
I assume I am.
It's just words, folks.
It's just words.
Those words, I've been hearing them for many years.
I heard them when they were running for the Senate in New York, where Hillary was going to bring back jobs to upstate New York and she failed.
I've heard them where Hillary is constantly talking about the inner cities of our country, which are a disaster education-wise, jobwise, safety-wise, in every way possible.
I'm going to help the African-Americans.
I'm going to help the Latinos, Hispanics.
I am going to help the inner cities.
She's done a terrible job for the African-Americans.
She wants their vote, and she does nothing, and then she comes back four years later.
We saw that firsthand when she was United States senator.
She campaigned where the primary part of her campaign... 
So, she's allowed to do that, but I'm not allowed to respond? 
Sounds fair.
It was locker room talk, as I told you.
That was locker room talk.
I'm not proud of it.
I am a person who has great respect for people, for my family, for the people of this country.
And certainly, I'm not proud of it.
But that was something that happened.
If you look at Bill Clinton, far worse.
Mine are words, and his was action.
His was what he's done to women.
There's never been anybody in the history politics in this nation that's been so abusive to women.
So you can say any way you want to say it, but Bill Clinton was abusive to women.
Hillary Clinton attacked those same women and attacked them viciously.
Four of them here tonight.
One of the women, who is a wonderful woman, at 12 years old, was raped at 12.
Her client she represented got him off, and she's seen laughing on two separate occasions, laughing at the girl who was raped.
Kathy Shelton, that young woman is here with us tonight.
So don't tell me about words.
I am absolutely -- I apologize for those words.
But it is things that people say.
But what President Clinton did, he was impeached, he lost his license to practice law.
He had to pay an $850,000 fine to one of the women.
Paula Jones, who's also here tonight.
And I will tell you that when Hillary brings up a point like that and she talks about words that I said 11 years ago, I think it's disgraceful, and I think she should be ashamed of herself, if you want to know the truth.
Well, you owe the president an apology, because as you know very well, your campaign, Sidney Blumenthal -- he's another real winner that you have -- and he's the one that got this started, along with your campaign manager, and they were on television just two weeks ago, she was, saying exactly that.
So you really owe him an apology.
You're the one that sent the pictures around your campaign, sent the pictures around with President Obama in a certain garb.
That was long before I was ever involved, so you actually owe an apology.
Number two, Michelle Obama.
I've gotten to see the commercials that they did on you.
And I've gotten to see some of the most vicious commercials I've ever seen of Michelle Obama talking about you, Hillary.
So, you talk about friend?
Go back and take a look at those commercials, a race where you lost fair and square, unlike the Bernie Sanders race, where you won, but not fair and square, in my opinion.
And all you have to do is take a look at WikiLeaks and just see what they say about Bernie Sanders and see what Deborah Wasserman Schultz had in mind, because Bernie Sanders, between super-delegates and Deborah Wasserman Schultz, he never had a chance.
And I was so surprised to see him sign on with the devil.
But when you talk about apology, I think the one that you should really be apologizing for and the thing that you should be apologizing for are the 33,000 e-mails that you deleted, and that you acid washed, and then the two boxes of e-mails and other things last week that were taken from an office and are now missing.
And I'll tell you what.
I didn't think I'd say this, but I'm going to say it, and I hate to say it.
But if I win, I am going to instruct my attorney general to get a special prosecutor to look into your situation, because there has never been so many lies, so much deception.
There has never been anything like it, and we're going to have a special prosecutor.
When I speak, I go out and speak, the people of this country are furious.
In my opinion, the people that have been long-term workers at the FBI are furious.
There has never been anything like this, where e-mails -- and you get a subpoena, you get a subpoena, and after getting the subpoena, you delete 33,000 e-mails, and then you acid wash them or bleach them, as you would say, very expensive process.
So we're going to get a special prosecutor, and we're going to look into it, because you know what?
People have been -- their lives have been destroyed for doing one-fifth of what you've done.
And it's a disgrace.
And honestly, you ought to be ashamed of yourself. 
Oh, really? 
Because you'd be in jail.
And yet she didn't know the word -- the letter C on a document.
Right?
She didn't even know what that word -- what that letter meant.
You know, it's amazing.
I'm watching Hillary go over facts.
And she's going after fact after fact, and she's lying again, because she said she -- you know, what she did with the e-mail was fine.
You think it was fine to delete 33,000 e-mails?
I don't think so.
She said the 33,000 e-mails had to do with her daughter's wedding, number one, and a yoga class.
Well, maybe we'll give three or three or four or five or something.
33,000 e-mails deleted, and now she's saying there wasn't anything wrong.
And more importantly, that was after getting a subpoena.
That wasn't before.
That was after.
She got it from the United States Congress.
And I'll be honest, I am so disappointed in congressmen, including Republicans, for allowing this to happen.
Our Justice Department, where our husband goes on to the back of a airplane for 39 minutes, talks to the attorney general days before a ruling is going to be made on her case.
But for you to say that there was nothing wrong with you deleting 39,000 e-mails, again, you should be ashamed of yourself.
What you did -- and this is after getting a subpoena from the United States Congress. 
You did that.
Wait a minute.
One second.
If you did that in the private sector, you'd be put in jail, let alone after getting a subpoena from the United States Congress. 
Oh, you didn't delete them? 
Oh, 33,000?
Yeah. 
Oh, yeah.
What about the other 15,000? 
Because you have nothing to say.
Get off this question.
Let's see what happens
I'd like to know, Anderson, why aren't you bringing up the e-mails?
I'd like to know.
Why aren't you bringing... 
No, it hasn't.
It hasn't.
And it hasn't been finished at all. 
It's nice to -- one on three.
No, I'm a gentlemen, Hillary.
Go ahead.
It is such a great question and it's maybe the question I get almost more than anything else, outside of defense.
Obamacare is a disaster.
You know it.
We all know it.
It's going up at numbers that nobody's ever seen worldwide.
Nobody's ever seen numbers like this for health care.
It's only getting worse.
In '17, it implodes by itself.
Their method of fixing it is to go back and ask Congress for more money, more and more money.
We have right now almost $20 trillion in debt.
Obamacare will never work.
It's very bad, very bad health insurance.
Far too expensive.
And not only expensive for the person that has it, unbelievably expensive for our country.
It's going to be one of the biggest line items very shortly.
We have to repeal it and replace it with something absolutely much less expensive and something that works, where your plan can actually be tailored.
We have to get rid of the lines around the state, artificial lines, where we stop insurance companies from coming in and competing, because they want -- and President Obama and whoever was working on it -- they want to leave those lines, because that gives the insurance companies essentially monopolies.
We want competition.
You will have the finest health care plan there is.
She wants to go to a single-payer plan, which would be a disaster, somewhat similar to Canada.
And if you haven't noticed the Canadians, when they need a big operation, when something happens, they come into the United States in many cases because their system is so slow.
It's catastrophic in certain ways.
But she wants to go to single payer, which means the government basically rules everything.
Hillary Clinton has been after this for years.
Obamacare was the first step.
Obamacare is a total disaster.
And not only are your rates going up by numbers that nobody's ever believed, but your deductibles are going up, so that unless you get hit by a truck, you're never going to be able to use it. 
It is a disastrous plan, and it has to be repealed and replaced. 
Well, I just want -- just one thing.
First of all, Hillary, everything's broken about it.
Everything.
Number two, Bernie Sanders said that Hillary Clinton has very bad judgment.
This is a perfect example of it, trying to save Obamacare, which is a disaster. 
By the way...
We're going to be able to.
You're going to have plans...
Well, I'll tell you what it means.
You're going to have plans that are so good, because we're going to have so much competition in the insurance industry.
Once we break out -- once we break out the lines and allow the competition to come... 
President Obama -- Anderson, excuse me.
President Obama, by keeping those lines, the boundary lines around each state, it was almost gone until just very toward the end of the passage of Obamacare, which, by the way, was a fraud.
You know that, because Jonathan Gruber, the architect of Obamacare, was said -- he said it was a great lie, it was a big lie.
President Obama said you keep your doctor, you keep your plan.
The whole thing was a fraud, and it doesn't work.
But when we get rid of those lines, you will have competition, and we will be able to keep pre-existing, we'll also be able to help people that can't get -- don't have money because we are going to have people protected.
And Republicans feel this way, believe it or not, and strongly this way.
We're going to block grant into the states.
We're going to block grant into Medicaid into the states... 
... so that we will be able to take care of people without the necessary funds to take care of themselves.
Well, you're right about Islamophobia, and that's a shame.
But one thing we have to do is we have to make sure that -- because there is a problem.
I mean, whether we like it or not, and we could be very politically correct, but whether we like it or not, there is a problem.
And we have to be sure that Muslims come in and report when they see something going on.
When they see hatred going on, they have to report it.
As an example, in San Bernardino, many people saw the bombs all over the apartment of the two people that killed 14 and wounded many, many people.
Horribly wounded.
They'll never be the same.
Muslims have to report the problems when they see them.
And, you know, there's always a reason for everything.
If they don't do that, it's a very difficult situation for our country, because you look at Orlando and you look at San Bernardino and you look at the World Trade Center.
Go outside.
Look at Paris.
Look at that horrible -- these are radical Islamic terrorists.
And she won't even mention the word and nor will President Obama.
He won't use the term "radical Islamic terrorism."
Now, to solve a problem, you have to be able to state what the problem is or at least say the name.
She won't say the name and President Obama won't say the name.
But the name is there.
It's radical Islamic terror.
And before you solve it, you have to say the name. 
First of all, Captain Khan is an American hero, and if I were president at that time, he would be alive today, because unlike her, who voted for the war without knowing what she was doing, I would not have had our people in Iraq.
Iraq was disaster.
So he would have been alive today.
The Muslim ban is something that in some form has morphed into a extreme vetting from certain areas of the world.
Hillary Clinton wants to allow hundreds of thousands -- excuse me.
Excuse me.. 
Why don't you interrupt her?
You interrupt me all the time.
Why don't you interrupt her?
It's called extreme vetting.
We are going to areas like Syria where they're coming in by the tens of thousands because of Barack Obama.
And Hillary Clinton wants to allow a 550 percent increase over Obama.
People are coming into our country like we have no idea who they are, where they are from, what their feelings about our country is, and she wants 550 percent more.
This is going to be the great Trojan horse of all time.
We have enough problems in this country.
I believe in building safe zones.
I believe in having other people pay for them, as an example, the Gulf states, who are not carrying their weight, but they have nothing but money, and take care of people.
But I don't want to have, with all the problems this country has and all of the problems that you see going on, hundreds of thousands of people coming in from Syria when we know nothing about them.
We know nothing about their values and we know nothing about their love for our country. 
That's not been debunked.
That has not been debunked.
I was against -- I was against the war in Iraq.
Has not been debunked.
And you voted for it.
And you shouldn't have.
Well, I just want to say... 
Excuse me.
She just went about 25 seconds over her time.
Could I just respond to this, please? 
Hillary Clinton, in terms of having people come into our country, we have many criminal illegal aliens.
When we want to send them back to their country, their country says we don't want them.
In some cases, they're murderers, drug lords, drug problems.
And they don't want them.
And Hillary Clinton, when she was secretary of state, said that's OK, we can't force it into their country.
Let me tell you, I'm going to force them right back into their country.
They're murderers and some very bad people.
And I will tell you very strongly, when Bernie Sanders said she had bad judgment, she has really bad judgment, because we are letting people into this country that are going to cause problems and crime like you've never seen.
We're also letting drugs pour through our southern border at a record clip.
At a record clip.
And it shouldn't be allowed to happen.
ICE just endorsed me.
They've never endorsed a presidential candidate.
The Border Patrol agents, 16,500, just recently endorsed me, and they endorsed me because I understand the border.
She doesn't.
She wants amnesty for everybody.
Come right in.
Come right over.
It's a horrible thing she's doing.
She's got bad judgment, and honestly, so bad that she should never be president of the United States.
That I can tell you. 
Well, I think I should respond, because -- so ridiculous.
Look, now she's blaming -- she got caught in a total lie.
Her papers went out to all her friends at the banks, Goldman Sachs and everybody else, and she said things -- WikiLeaks that just came out.
And she lied.
Now she's blaming the lie on the late, great Abraham Lincoln.
That's one that I haven't... 
OK, Honest Abe, Honest Abe never lied.
That's the good thing.
That's the big difference between Abraham Lincoln and you.
That's a big, big difference.
We're talking about some difference.
But as far as other elements of what she was saying, I don't know Putin.
I think it would be great if we got along with Russia because we could fight ISIS together, as an example.
But I don't know Putin.
But I notice, anytime anything wrong happens, they like to say the Russians are -- she doesn't know if it's the Russians doing the hacking.
Maybe there is no hacking.
But they always blame Russia.
And the reason they blame Russia because they think they're trying to tarnish me with Russia.
I know nothing about Russia.
I know -- I know about Russia, but I know nothing about the inner workings of Russia.
I don't deal there.
I have no businesses there.
I have no loans from Russia.
I have a very, very great balance sheet, so great that when I did the Old Post Office on Pennsylvania Avenue, the United States government, because of my balance sheet, which they actually know very well, chose me to do the Old Post Office, between the White House and Congress, chose me to do the Old Post Office.
One of the primary area things, in fact, perhaps the primary thing was balance sheet.
But I have no loans with Russia.
You could go to the United States government, and they would probably tell you that, because they know my sheet very well in order to get that development I had to have.
Now, the taxes are a very simple thing.
As soon as I have -- first of all, I pay hundreds of millions of dollars in taxes.
Many of her friends took bigger deductions.
Warren Buffett took a massive deduction.
Soros, who's a friend of hers, took a massive deduction.
Many of the people that are giving her all this money that she can do many more commercials than me gave her -- took massive deductions.
I pay hundreds of millions of dollars in taxes.
But -- but as soon as my routine audit is finished, I'll release my returns.
I'll be very proud to.
They're actually quite great. 
Well, one thing I'd do is get rid of carried interest.
One of the greatest provisions for people like me, to be honest with you, I give up a lot when I run, because I knock out the tax code.
And she could have done this years ago, by the way.
She's a United States -- she was a United States senator.
She complains that Donald Trump took advantage of the tax code.
Well, why didn't she change it?
Why didn't you change it when you were a senator?
The reason you didn't is that all your friends take the same advantage that I do.
And I do.
You have provisions in the tax code that, frankly, we could change.
But you wouldn't change it, because all of these people gave you the money so you can take negative ads on Donald Trump.
But -- and I say that about a lot of things.
You know, I've heard Hillary complaining about so many different things over the years.
"I wish you would have done this."
But she's been there for 30 years she's been doing this stuff.
She never changed.
And she never will change.
She never will change.
We're getting rid of carried interest provisions.
I'm lowering taxes actually, because I think it's so important for corporations, because we have corporations leaving -- massive corporations and little ones, little ones can't form.
We're getting rid of regulations which goes hand in hand with the lowering of the taxes.
But we're bringing the tax rate down from 35 percent to 15 percent.
We're cutting taxes for the middle class.
And I will tell you, we are cutting them big league for the middle class.
And I will tell you, Hillary Clinton is raising your taxes, folks.
You can look at me.
She's raising your taxes really high.
And what that's going to do is a disaster for the country.
But she is raising your taxes and I'm lowering your taxes.
That in itself is a big difference.
We are going to be thriving again.
We have no growth in this country.
There's no growth.
If China has a GDP of 7 percent, it's like a national catastrophe.
We're down at 1 percent.
And that's, like, no growth.
And we're going lower, in my opinion.
And a lot of it has to do with the fact that our taxes are so high, just about the highest in the world.
And I'm bringing them down to one of the lower in the world.
And I think it's so important -- one of the most important things we can do.
But she is raising everybody's taxes massively. 
Of course I do.
Of course I do.
And so do all of her donors, or most of her donors.
I know many of her donors.
Her donors took massive tax write-offs. 
A lot of my -- excuse me, Anderson -- a lot of my write- off was depreciation and other things that Hillary as a senator allowed.
And she'll always allow it, because the people that give her all this money, they want it.
That's why.
See, I understand the tax code better than anybody that's ever run for president.
Hillary Clinton -- and it's extremely complex -- Hillary Clinton has friends that want all of these provisions, including they want the carried interest provision, which is very important to Wall Street people.
But they really want the carried interest provision, which I believe Hillary's leaving.
Very interesting why she's leaving carried interest.
But I will tell you that, number one, I pay tremendous numbers of taxes.
I absolutely used it.
And so did Warren Buffett and so did George Soros and so did many of the other people that Hillary is getting money from.
Now, I won't mention their names, because they're rich, but they're not famous.
So we won't make them famous. 
No, but I pay tax, and I pay federal tax, too.
But I have a write-off, a lot of it's depreciation, which is a wonderful charge.
I love depreciation.
You know, she's given it to us.
Hey, if she had a problem -- for 30 years she's been doing this, Anderson.
I say it all the time.
She talks about health care.
Why didn't she do something about it?
She talks about taxes.
Why didn't she do something about it?
She doesn't do anything about anything other than talk.
With her, it's all talk and no action. 
And, again, Bernie Sanders, it's really bad judgment.
She has made bad judgment not only on taxes.
She's made bad judgments on Libya, on Syria, on Iraq.
I mean, her and Obama, whether you like it or not, the way they got out of Iraq, the vacuum they've left, that's why ISIS formed in the first place.
They started from that little area, and now they're in 32 different nations, Hillary.
Congratulations.
Great job. 
Why didn't you do it?
Why didn't you do it?
Oh, really? 
You could have done it, if you were an effective -- if you were an effective senator, you could have done it.
If you were an effective senator, you could have done it.
But you were not an effective senator. 
She said a lot of things that were false.
I mean, I think we should be allowed to maybe... 
Excuse me.
Because she has been a disaster as a senator.
A disaster.
First of all, she was there as secretary of state with the so-called line in the sand, which... 
OK.
But you were in contact -- excuse me.
You were...
You were in total contact with the White House, and perhaps, sadly, Obama probably still listened to you.
I don't think he would be listening to you very much anymore.
Obama draws the line in the sand.
It was laughed at all over the world what happened.
Now, with that being said, she talks tough against Russia.
But our nuclear program has fallen way behind, and they've gone wild with their nuclear program.
Not good.
Our government shouldn't have allowed that to happen.
Russia is new in terms of nuclear.
We are old.
We're tired.
We're exhausted in terms of nuclear.
A very bad thing.
Now, she talks tough, she talks really tough against Putin and against Assad.
She talks in favor of the rebels.
She doesn't even know who the rebels are.
You know, every time we take rebels, whether it's in Iraq or anywhere else, we're arming people.
And you know what happens?
They end up being worse than the people.
Look at what she did in Libya with Gadhafi.
Gadhafi's out.
It's a mess.
And, by the way, ISIS has a good chunk of their oil.
I'm sure you probably have heard that.
It was a disaster.
Because the fact is, almost everything she's done in foreign policy has been a mistake and it's been a disaster.
But if you look at Russia, just take a look at Russia, and look at what they did this week, where I agree, she wasn't there, but possibly she's consulted.
We sign a peace treaty.
Everyone's all excited.
Well, what Russia did with Assad and, by the way, with Iran, who you made very powerful with the dumbest deal perhaps I've ever seen in the history of deal-making, the Iran deal, with the $150 billion, with the $1.7 billion in cash, which is enough to fill up this room.
But look at that deal.
Iran now and Russia are now against us.
So she wants to fight.
She wants to fight for rebels.
There's only one problem.
You don't even know who the rebels are.
So what's the purpose? 
And one thing I have to say.
I don't like Assad at all, but Assad is killing ISIS.
Russia is killing ISIS.
And Iran is killing ISIS.
And those three have now lined up because of our weak foreign policy. 
OK.
He and I haven't spoken, and I disagree.
I disagree. 
I think you have to knock out ISIS.
Right now, Syria is fighting ISIS.
We have people that want to fight both at the same time.
But Syria is no longer Syria.
Syria is Russia and it's Iran, who she made strong and Kerry and Obama made into a very powerful nation and a very rich nation, very, very quickly, very, very quickly.
I believe we have to get ISIS.
We have to worry about ISIS before we can get too much more involved.
She had a chance to do something with Syria.
They had a chance.
And that was the line.
And she didn't. 
I think Aleppo is a disaster, humanitarian-wise. 
I think that it basically has fallen.
OK?
It basically has fallen.
Let me tell you something.
You take a look at Mosul.
The biggest problem I have with the stupidity of our foreign policy, we have Mosul.
They think a lot of the ISIS leaders are in Mosul.
So we have announcements coming out of Washington and coming out of Iraq, we will be attacking Mosul in three weeks or four weeks.
Well, all of these bad leaders from ISIS are leaving Mosul.
Why can't they do it quietly?
Why can't they do the attack, make it a sneak attack, and after the attack is made, inform the American public that we've knocked out the leaders, we've had a tremendous success?
People leave.
Why do they have to say we're going to be attacking Mosul within the next four to six weeks, which is what they're saying?
How stupid is our country? 
I can't think of any.
I can't think of any.
And I'm pretty good at it.
And we have General Flynn.
And we have -- look, I have 200 generals and admirals who endorsed me.
I have 21 Congressional Medal of Honor recipients who endorsed me.
We talk about it all the time.
They understand, why can't they do something secretively, where they go in and they knock out the leadership?
How -- why would these people stay there?
I've been reading now... 
... for weeks -- I've been reading now for weeks about Mosul, that it's the harbor of where -- you know, between Raqqa and Mosul, this is where they think the ISIS leaders are.
Why would they be saying -- they're not staying there anymore.
They're gone.
Because everybody's talking about how Iraq, which is us with our leadership, goes in to fight Mosul.
Now, with these 200 admirals and generals, they can't believe it.
All I say is this.
General George Patton, General Douglas MacArthur are spinning in their grave at the stupidity of what we're doing in the Middle East. 
Everything.
You know what's funny?
She went over a minute over, and you don't stop her.
When I go one second over, it's like a big deal. 
It's really -- it's really very interesting.
Absolutely.
I mean, she calls our people deplorable, a large group, and irredeemable.
I will be a president for all of our people.
And I'll be a president that will turn our inner cities around and will give strength to people and will give economics to people and will bring jobs back.
Because NAFTA, signed by her husband, is perhaps the greatest disaster trade deal in the history of the world.
Not in this country.
It stripped us of manufacturing jobs.
We lost our jobs.
We lost our money.
We lost our plants.
It is a disaster.
And now she wants to sign TPP, even though she says now she's for it.
She called it the gold standard.
And by the way, at the last debate, she lied, because it turned out that she did say the gold standard and she said she didn't say it.
They actually said that she lied.
OK?
And she lied.
But she's lied about a lot of things. 
I would be a president for all of the people, African- Americans, the inner cities.
Devastating what's happening to our inner cities.
She's been talking about it for years.
As usual, she talks about it, nothing happens.
She doesn't get it done.
Same with the Latino Americans, the Hispanic Americans.
The same exact thing.
They talk, they don't get it done.
You go into the inner cities and -- you see it's 45 percent poverty.
African- Americans now 45 percent poverty in the inner cities.
The education is a disaster.
Jobs are essentially nonexistent.
I mean, it's -- you know, and I've been saying at big speeches where I have 20,000 and 30,000 people, what do you have to lose?
It can't get any worse.
And she's been talking about the inner cities for 25 years.
Nothing's going to ever happen.
Let me tell you, if she's president of the United States, nothing's going to happen.
It's just going to be talk.
And all of her friends, the taxes we were talking about, and I would just get it by osmosis.
She's not doing any me favors.
But by doing all the others' favors, she's doing me favors. 
But I will tell you, she's all talk.
It doesn't get done.
All you have to do is take a look at her Senate run.
Take a look at upstate New York. 
It turned out to be a disaster.
... but we believed that we could make the country better.
And I was proud of that.
We have a divided nation.
We have a very divided nation.
You look at Charlotte.
You look at Baltimore.
You look at the violence that's taking place in the inner cities, Chicago, you take a look at Washington, D.C. We have an increase in murder within our cities, the biggest in 45 years.
We have a divided nation, because people like her -- and believe me, she has tremendous hate in her heart.
And when she said deplorables, she meant it.
And when she said irredeemable, they're irredeemable, you didn't mention that, but when she said they're irredeemable, to me that might have been even worse. 
She's got tremendous -- she's got tremendous hatred.
And this country cannot take another four years of Barack Obama, and that's what you're getting with her. 
No, there wasn't check out a sex tape.
It was just take a look at the person that she built up to be this wonderful Girl Scout who was no Girl Scout. 
By the way, just so you understand, when she said 3 o'clock in the morning, take a look at Benghazi.
She said who is going to answer the call at 3 o'clock in the morning?
Guess what?
She didn't answer it, because when Ambassador Stevens... 
... 600 -- wait a minute, Anderson, 600 times.
Well, she said she was awake at 3 o'clock in the morning, and she also sent a tweet out at 3 o'clock in the morning, but I won't even mention that.
But she said she'll be awake.
Who's going -- the famous thing, we're going to answer our call at 3 o'clock in the morning.
Guess what happened?
Ambassador Stevens -- Ambassador Stevens sent 600 requests for help.
And the only one she talked to was Sidney Blumenthal, who's her friend and not a good guy, by the way.
So, you know, she shouldn't be talking about that.
Now, tweeting happens to be a modern day form of communication.
I mean, you can like it or not like it.
I have, between Facebook and Twitter, I have almost 25 million people.
It's a very effective way of communication.
So you can put it down, but it is a very effective form of communication.
I'm not un-proud of it, to be honest with you. 
I'm shocked to hear that.
We have the slowest growth since 1929.
It is -- our country has the slowest growth and jobs are a disaster.
Justice Scalia, great judge, died recently.
And we have a vacancy.
I am looking to appoint judges very much in the mold of Justice Scalia.
I'm looking for judges -- and I've actually picked 20 of them so that people would see, highly respected, highly thought of, and actually very beautifully reviewed by just about everybody.
But people that will respect the Constitution of the United States.
And I think that this is so important.
Also, the Second Amendment, which is totally under siege by people like Hillary Clinton.
They'll respect the Second Amendment and what it stands for, what it represents.
So important to me.
Now, Hillary mentioned something about contributions just so you understand.
So I will have in my race more than $100 million put in -- of my money, meaning I'm not taking all of this big money from all of these different corporations like she's doing.
What I ask is this.
So I'm putting in more than -- by the time it's finished, I'll have more than $100 million invested.
Pretty much self-funding money.
We're raising money for the Republican Party, and we're doing tremendously on the small donations, $61 average or so.
I ask Hillary, why doesn't -- she made $250 million by being in office.
She used the power of her office to make a lot of money.
Why isn't she funding, not for $100 million, but why don't you put $10 million or $20 million or $25 million or $30 million into your own campaign?
It's $30 million less for special interests that will tell you exactly what to do and it would really, I think, be a nice sign to the American public.
Why aren't you putting some money in?
You have a lot of it.
You've made a lot of it because of the fact that you've been in office.
Made a lot of it while you were secretary of state, actually.
So why aren't you putting money into your own campaign?
I'm just curious. 
Absolutely.
I think it's such a great question, because energy is under siege by the Obama administration.
Under absolutely siege.
The EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, is killing these energy companies.
And foreign companies are now coming in buying our -- buying so many of our different plants and then re-jiggering the plant so that they can take care of their oil.
We are killing -- absolutely killing our energy business in this country.
Now, I'm all for alternative forms of energy, including wind, including solar, et cetera.
But we need much more than wind and solar.
And you look at our miners.
Hillary Clinton wants to put all the miners out of business.
There is a thing called clean coal.
Coal will last for 1,000 years in this country.
Now we have natural gas and so many other things because of technology.
We have unbelievable -- we have found over the last seven years, we have found tremendous wealth right under our feet.
So good.
Especially when you have $20 trillion in debt.
I will bring our energy companies back.
They'll be able to compete.
They'll make money.
They'll pay off our national debt.
They'll pay off our tremendous budget deficits, which are tremendous.
But we are putting our energy companies out of business.
We have to bring back our workers.
You take a look at what's happening to steel and the cost of steel and China dumping vast amounts of steel all over the United States, which essentially is killing our steelworkers and our steel companies.
We have to guard our energy companies.
We have to make it possible.
The EPA is so restrictive that they are putting our energy companies out of business.
And all you have to do is go to a great place like West Virginia or places like Ohio, which is phenomenal, or places like Pennsylvania and you see what they're doing to the people, miners and others in the energy business.
It's a disgrace. 
It's an absolute disgrace.
Well, I consider her statement about my children to be a very nice compliment.
I don't know if it was meant to be a compliment, but it is a great -- I'm very proud of my children.
And they've done a wonderful job, and they've been wonderful, wonderful kids.
So I consider that a compliment.
I will say this about Hillary.
She doesn't quit.
She doesn't give up.
I respect that.
I tell it like it is.
She's a fighter.
I disagree with much of what she's fighting for.
I do disagree with her judgment in many cases.
But she does fight hard, and she doesn't quit, and she doesn't give up.
And I consider that to be a very good trait. 
Well, first of all, it's great to be with you, and thank you, everybody.
The Supreme Court: It's what it's all about.
Our country is so, so -- it's just so imperative that we have the right justices.
Something happened recently where Justice Ginsburg made some very, very inappropriate statements toward me and toward a tremendous number of people, many, many millions of people that I represent.
And she was forced to apologize.
And apologize she did.
But these were statements that should never, ever have been made.
We need a Supreme Court that in my opinion is going to uphold the Second Amendment, and all amendments, but the Second Amendment, which is under absolute siege.
I believe if my opponent should win this race, which I truly don't think will happen, we will have a Second Amendment which will be a very, very small replica of what it is right now.
But I feel that it's absolutely important that we uphold, because of the fact that it is under such trauma.
I feel that the justices that I am going to appoint -- and I've named 20 of them -- the justices that I'm going to appoint will be pro-life.
They will have a conservative bent.
They will be protecting the Second Amendment.
They are great scholars in all cases, and they're people of tremendous respect.
They will interpret the Constitution the way the founders wanted it interpreted.
And I believe that's very, very important.
I don't think we should have justices appointed that decide what they want to hear.
It's all about the Constitution of -- of -- and so important, the Constitution the way it was meant to be.
And those are the people that I will appoint. 
Well, the D.C. vs. Heller decision was very strongly -- and she was extremely angry about it.
I watched.
I mean, she was very, very angry when upheld.
And Justice Scalia was so involved.
And it was a well-crafted decision.
But Hillary was extremely upset, extremely angry.
And people that believe in the Second Amendment and believe in it very strongly were very upset with what she had to say. 
Well, let me just tell you before we go any further.
In Chicago, which has the toughest gun laws in the United States, probably you could say by far, they have more gun violence than any other city.
So we have the toughest laws, and you have tremendous gun violence.
I am a very strong supporter of the Second Amendment.
And I am -- I don't know if Hillary was saying it in a sarcastic manner, but I'm very proud to have the endorsement of the NRA.
And it's the earliest endorsement they've ever given to anybody who ran for president.
So I'm very honored by all of that.
We are going to appoint justices -- this is the best way to help the Second Amendment.
We are going to appoint justices that will feel very strongly about the Second Amendment, that will not do damage to the Second Amendment. 
Right.
Well, if that would happen, because I am pro-life, and I will be appointing pro-life judges, I would think that that will go back to the individual states. 
If they overturned it, it will go back to the states. 
Well, if we put another two or perhaps three justice on, that's really what's going to be -- that will happen.
And that'll happen automatically, in my opinion, because I am putting pro-life justices on the court.
I will say this: It will go back to the states, and the states will then make a determination. 
Well, I think it's terrible.
If you go with what Hillary is saying, in the ninth month, you can take the baby and rip the baby out of the womb of the mother just prior to the birth of the baby.
Now, you can say that that's OK and Hillary can say that that's OK.
But it's not OK with me, because based on what she's saying, and based on where she's going, and where she's been, you can take the baby and rip the baby out of the womb in the ninth month on the final day.
And that's not acceptable. 
And, honestly, nobody has business doing what I just said, doing that, as late as one or two or three or four days prior to birth.
Nobody has that. 
Well, first of all, she wants to give amnesty, which is a disaster and very unfair to all of the people that are waiting on line for many, many years.
We need strong borders.
In the audience tonight, we have four mothers of -- I mean, these are unbelievable people that I've gotten to know over a period of years whose children have been killed, brutally killed by people that came into the country illegally.
You have thousands of mothers and fathers and relatives all over the country.
They're coming in illegally.
Drugs are pouring in through the border.
We have no country if we have no border.
Hillary wants to give amnesty.
She wants to have open borders.
The border -- as you know, the Border Patrol agents, 16,500-plus ICE last week, endorsed me.
First time they've ever endorsed a candidate.
It means their job is tougher.
But they know what's going on.
They know it better than anybody.
They want strong borders.
They feel we have to have strong borders.
I was up in New Hampshire the other day.
The biggest complaint they have -- it's with all of the problems going on in the world, many of the problems caused by Hillary Clinton and by Barack Obama.
All of the problems -- the single biggest problem is heroin that pours across our southern border.
It's just pouring and destroying their youth.
It's poisoning the blood of their youth and plenty of other people.
We have to have strong borders.
We have to keep the drugs out of our country.
We are -- right now, we're getting the drugs, they're getting the cash.
We need strong borders.
We need absolute -- we cannot give amnesty.
Now, I want to build the wall.
We need the wall.
And the Border Patrol, ICE, they all want the wall.
We stop the drugs.
We shore up the border.
One of my first acts will be to get all of the drug lords, all of the bad ones -- we have some bad, bad people in this country that have to go out.
We're going to get them out; we're going to secure the border.
And once the border is secured, at a later date, we'll make a determination as to the rest.
But we have some bad hombres here, and we're going to get them out. 
Chris, I think it's... 
I think I should respond to that.
First of all, I had a very good meeting with the president of Mexico.
Very nice man.
We will be doing very much better with Mexico on trade deals.
Believe me.
The NAFTA deal signed by her husband is one of the worst deals ever made of any kind, signed by anybody.
It's a disaster.
Hillary Clinton wanted the wall.
Hillary Clinton fought for the wall in 2006 or thereabouts.
Now, she never gets anything done, so naturally the wall wasn't built.
But Hillary Clinton wanted the wall. 
We are a country of laws.
We either have -- and by the way...
Well -- well, but she said one thing. 
And the wall.
President Obama has moved millions of people out.
Nobody knows about it, nobody talks about it.
But under Obama, millions of people have been moved out of this country.
They've been deported.
She doesn't want to say that, but that's what's happened, and that's what happened big league.
As far as moving these people out and moving -- we either have a country or we don't.
We're a country of laws.
We either have a border or we don't.
Now, you can come back in and you can become a citizen.
But it's very unfair.
We have millions of people that did it the right way.
They're on line.
They're waiting.
We're going to speed up the process, big league, because it's very inefficient.
But they're on line and they're waiting to become citizens.
Very unfair that somebody runs across the border, becomes a citizen, under her plan, you have open borders.
You would have a disaster on trade, and you will have a disaster with your open borders. 
But what she doesn't say is that President Obama has deported millions and millions of people just the way it is.
Thank you.
That was a great pivot off the fact that she wants open borders, OK?
How did we get on to Putin? 
So just to finish on the borders...
She wants open borders.
People are going to pour into our country.
People are going to come in from Syria.
She wants 550 percent more people than Barack Obama, and he has thousands and thousands of people.
They have no idea where they come from.
And you see, we are going to stop radical Islamic terrorism in this country.
She won't even mention the words, and neither will President Obama.
So I just want to tell you, she wants open borders.
Now we can talk about Putin.
I don't know Putin.
He said nice things about me.
If we got along well, that would be good.
If Russia and the United States got along well and went after ISIS, that would be good.
He has no respect for her.
He has no respect for our president.
And I'll tell you what: We're in very serious trouble, because we have a country with tremendous numbers of nuclear warheads -- 1,800, by the way -- where they expanded and we didn't, 1,800 nuclear warheads.
And she's playing chicken.
Look, Putin... 
... from everything I see, has no respect for this person. 
No puppet.
No puppet.
You're the puppet!
No, you're the puppet. 
She has no idea whether it's Russia, China, or anybody else. 
She has no idea.
Hillary, you have no idea. 
And our country has no idea.
Yeah, I doubt it.
I doubt it. 
She doesn't like Putin because Putin has outsmarted her at every step of the way.
Excuse me.
Putin has outsmarted her in Syria.
He's outsmarted her every step of the way.
Yes, that's fine. 
By Russia or anybody else.
Of course I condemn.
Of course I -- I don't know Putin.
I have no idea.
I never met Putin.
This is not my best friend.
But if the United States got along with Russia, wouldn't be so bad.
Let me tell you, Putin has outsmarted her and Obama at every single step of the way.
Whether it's Syria, you name it.
Missiles.
Take a look at the "start up" that they signed.
The Russians have said, according to many, many reports, I can't believe they allowed us to do this.
They create warheads, and we can't.
The Russians can't believe it.
She has been outsmarted by Putin.
And all you have to do is look at the Middle East.
They've taken over.
We've spent $6 trillion.
They've taken over the Middle East.
She has been outsmarted and outplayed worse than anybody I've ever seen in any government whatsoever. 
And she always will be.
Wrong.
I have 200 generals...
... and admirals, 21 endorsing me, 21 congressional Medal of Honor recipients.
As far as Japan and other countries, we are being ripped off by everybody in the -- we're defending other countries.
We are spending a fortune doing it.
They have the bargain of the century.
All I said is, we have to renegotiate these agreements, because our country cannot afford to defend Saudi Arabia, Japan, Germany, South Korea, and many other places.
We cannot continue to afford -- she took that as saying nuclear weapons. 
Look, she's been proven to be a liar on so many different ways.
This is just another lie. 
There's no quote.
You're not going to find a quote from me.
And defend yourselves.
And defend yourselves.
I didn't say nuclear.
And defend yourself.
Yes.
Well, first of all, before I start on my plan, her plan is going to raise taxes and even double your taxes.
Her tax plan is a disaster.
And she can say all she wants about college tuition.
And I'm a big proponent.
We're going to do a lot of things for college tuition.
But the rest of the public's going to be paying for it.
We will have a massive, massive tax increase under Hillary Clinton's plan. 
But I'd like to start off where we left, because when I said Japan and Germany, and I'm -- not to single them out, but South Korea, these are very rich, powerful countries.
Saudi Arabia, nothing but money.
We protect Saudi Arabia.
Why aren't they paying?
She immediately -- when she heard this, I questioned it, and I questioned NATO.
Why aren't the NATO questioned -- why aren't they paying?
Because they weren't paying.
Since I did this -- this was a year ago -- all of a sudden, they're paying.
And I've been given a lot -- a lot of credit for it.
All of a sudden, they're starting to pay up.
They have to pay up.
We're protecting people, they have to pay up.
And I'm a big fan of NATO.
But they have to pay up.
She comes out and said, we love our allies, we think our allies are great.
Well, it's awfully hard to get them to pay up when you have somebody saying we think how great they are.
We have to tell Japan in a very nice way, we have to tell Germany, all of these countries, South Korea, we have to say, you have to help us out.
We have, during his regime, during President Obama's regime, we've doubled our national debt.
We're up to $20 trillion.
So my plan -- we're going to renegotiate trade deals.
We're going to have a lot of free trade.
We're going to have free trade, more free trade than we have right now.
But we have horrible deals.
Our jobs are being taken out by the deal that her husband signed, NAFTA, one of the worst deals ever.
Our jobs are being sucked out of our economy.
You look at all of the places that I just left, you go to Pennsylvania, you go to Ohio, you go to Florida, you go to any of them.
You go upstate New York.
Our jobs have fled to Mexico and other places.
We're bringing our jobs back.
I am going to renegotiate NAFTA.
And if I can't make a great deal -- then we're going to terminate NAFTA and we're going to create new deals.
We're going to have trade, but we're going -- we're going to terminate it, we're going to make a great trade deal.
And if we can't, we're going to do it -- we're going to go a separate way, because it has been a disaster.
We are going to cut taxes massively.
We're going to cut business taxes massively.
They're going to start hiring people.
We're going to bring the $2.5 trillion... 
... that's offshore back into the country.
We are going to start the engine rolling again, because... 
... right now, our country is dying at 1 percent GDP. 
You can't.
Correct.
Over a 10-year period.
So I just left some high representatives of India.
They're growing at 8 percent.
China is growing at 7 percent.
And that for them is a catastrophically low number.
We are growing -- our last report came out -- and it's right around the 1 percent level.
And I think it's going down.
Last week, as you know, the end of last week, they came out with an anemic jobs report.
A terrible jobs report.
In fact I said, is that the last jobs report before the election?
Because if it is, I should win easily, it was so bad.
The report was so bad.
Look, our country is stagnant.
We've lost our jobs.
We've lost our businesses.
We're not making things anymore, relatively speaking.
Our product is pouring in from China, pouring in from Vietnam, pouring in from all over the world.
I've visited so many communities.
This has been such an incredible education for me, Chris.
I've gotten to know so many -- I've developed so many friends over the last year.
And they cry when they see what's happened.
I pass factories that were thriving 20, 25 years ago, and because of the bill that her husband signed and she blessed 100 percent, it is just horrible what's happened to these people in these communities.
Now, she can say that her husband did well, but, boy, did they suffer as NAFTA kicked in, because it didn't really kick in very much, but it kicked in after they left.
Boy, did they suffer.
That was one of the worst things that's ever been signed by our country.
Now she wants to sign Trans-Pacific Partnership.
And she wants it.
She lied when she said she didn't call it the gold standard in one of the debates.
She totally lied.
She did call it the gold standard.
And they actually fact checked, and they said I was right.
I was so honored. 
And that will be as bad as NAFTA.
Well, let me just say -- let me just say. 
Let me ask a simple question.
She's been doing this for 30 years.
Why the hell didn't you do it over the last 15, 20 years? 
You were very much involved -- excuse me.
My turn.
You were very much involved in every aspect of this country.
Very much.
And you do have experience.
I say the one thing you have over me is experience, but it's bad experience, because what you've done has turned out badly.
For 30 years, you've been in a position to help, and if you say that I use steel or I use something else, I -- make it impossible for me to do that.
I wouldn't mind.
The problem is, you talk, but you don't get anything done, Hillary.
You don't.
Just like when you ran the State Department, $6 billion was missing.
How do you miss $6 billion?
You ran the State Department, $6 billion was either stolen.
They don't know.
It's gone, $6 billion.
If you become president, this country is going to be in some mess.
Believe me. 
Give me a break.
Well, I think I did a much better job.
I built a massive company, a great company, some of the greatest assets anywhere in the world, worth many, many billions of dollars.
I started with a $1 million loan.
I agree with that.
It's a $1 million loan.
But I built a phenomenal company.
And if we could run our country the way I've run my company, we would have a country that you would be so proud of.
You would even be proud of it.
And frankly, when you look at her real record, take a look at Syria.
Take a look at the migration.
Take a look at Libya.
Take a look at Iraq.
She gave us ISIS, because her and Obama created this huge vacuum, and a small group came out of that huge vacuum because when -- we should never have been in Iraq, but once we were there, we should have never got out the way they wanted to get out.
She gave us ISIS as sure as you are sitting there.
And what happened is now ISIS is in 32 countries.
And now I listen how she's going to get rid of ISIS.
She's going to get rid of nobody. 
Well, first of all, those stories have been largely debunked.
Those people -- I don't know those people.
I have a feeling how they came.
I believe it was her campaign that did it.
Just like if you look at what came out today on the clips where I was wondering what happened with my rally in Chicago and other rallies where we had such violence?
She's the one and Obama that caused the violence.
They hired people -- they paid them $1,500, and they're on tape saying be violent, cause fights, do bad things.
I would say the only way -- because those stories are all totally false, I have to say that.
And I didn't even apologize to my wife, who's sitting right here, because I didn't do anything.
I didn't know any of these -- I didn't see these women.
These women -- the woman on the plane, the -- I think they want either fame or her campaign did it.
And I think it's her campaign.
Because what I saw what they did, which is a criminal act, by the way, where they're telling people to go out and start fist-fights and start violence.
And I'll tell you what, in particular in Chicago, people were hurt and people could have been killed in that riot.
And that was now all on tape, started by her.
I believe, Chris, that she got these people to step forward.
If it wasn't, they get their 10 minutes of fame.
But they were all totally -- it was all fiction.
It was lies, and it was fiction. 
I did not say that.
I did not say that.
I did not say that.
Nobody has more respect for women than I do.
Nobody.
Nobody has more respect...
And frankly, those stories have been largely debunked.
And I really want to just talk about something slightly different.
She mentions this, which is all fiction, all fictionalized, probably or possibly started by her and her very sleazy campaign.
But I will tell you what isn't fictionalized are her e-mails, where she destroyed 33,000 e-mails criminally, criminally, after getting a subpoena from the United States Congress.
What happened to the FBI, I don't know.
We have a great general, four-star general, today you read it in all of the papers, going to potentially serve five years in jail for lying to the FBI.
One lie.
She's lied hundreds of times to the people, to Congress, and to the FBI.
He's going to probably go to jail.
This is a four-star general.
And she gets away with it, and she can run for the presidency of the United States?
That's really what you should be talking about, not fiction, where somebody wants fame or where they come out of her crooked campaign. 
Wrong.
So sad when she talks about violence at my rallies, and she caused the violence.
It's on tape. 
The other things are false, but honestly, I'd love to talk about getting rid of ISIS, and I'd love to talk about other things... 
... but those other charges, as she knows, are false. 
I think that it's been very well...
It's been very well studied.
... and it's a criminal enterprise, and so many people know it. 
It's a criminal enterprise.
Saudi Arabia giving $25 million, Qatar, all of these countries.
You talk about women and women's rights?
So these are people that push gays off business -- off buildings.
These are people that kill women and treat women horribly.
And yet you take their money.
So I'd like to ask you right now, why don't you give back the money that you've taken from certain countries that treat certain groups of people so horribly?
Why don't you give back the money?
I think it would be a great gesture.
Because she takes a tremendous amount of money.
And you take a look at the people of Haiti.
I was at a little Haiti the other day in Florida.
And I want to tell you, they hate the Clintons, because what's happened in Haiti with the Clinton Foundation is a disgrace.
And you know it, and they know it, and everybody knows it. 
They don't want you to help them anymore.
I'd like to mention one thing.
Trump Foundation, small foundation.
People contribute, I contribute.
The money goes 100 percent -- 100 percent goes to different charities, including a lot of military.
I don't get anything.
I don't buy boats.
I don't buy planes.
What happens -- the money goes to them. 
No, it was -- we put up the American flag.
And that's it.
They put up the American flag.
We fought for the right in Palm Beach to put up the American flag. 
There was.
There was.
And, by the way... 
... the money -- the money went to Fisher House, where they build houses -- the money that you're talking about went to Fisher House, where they build houses for veterans and disabled vets. 
So let me just tell you very quickly, we're entitled because of the laws that people like her passed to take massive amounts of depreciation on other charges, and we do it.
And all of her donors -- just about all of them -- I know Buffett took hundreds of millions of dollars, Soros, George Soros, took hundreds of millions of dollars... 
Let me just explain.
Most of her donors have done the same thing as I do.
You know what she should have done?
And you know, Hillary, what you should have done, you should have changed the law when you were a United States senator... 
... because your donors and your special interests are doing the same thing as I do, except even more so. 
You should have changed the law.
But you won't change the law, because you take in so much money.
I mean, I sat in my apartment today on a very beautiful hotel down the street known as Trump... 
But I will tell you, I sat there
...
I sat there watching ad after ad after ad, false ad.
All paid for by your friends on Wall Street that gave so much money because they know you're going to protect them.
And, frankly, you should have changed the laws. 
If you don't like what I did, you should have changed the laws. 
I will look at it at the time.
I'm not looking at anything now.
I'll look at it at the time.
What I've seen -- what I've seen is so bad.
First of all, the media is so dishonest and so corrupt, and the pile-on is so amazing.
The New York Times actually wrote an article about it, but they don't even care.
It's so dishonest.
And they've poisoned the mind of the voters.
But unfortunately for them, I think the voters are seeing through it.
I think they're going to see through it.
We'll find out on November 8th.
But I think they're going to see through it. 
If you look -- excuse me, Chris -- if you look at your voter rolls, you will see millions of people that are registered to vote -- millions, this isn't coming from me -- this is coming from Pew Report and other places -- millions of people that are registered to vote that shouldn't be registered to vote.
So let me just give you one other thing.
So I talk about the corrupt media.
I talk about the millions of people -- tell you one other thing.
She shouldn't be allowed to run.
It's crooked -- she's -- she's guilty of a very, very serious crime.
She should not be allowed to run.
And just in that respect, I say it's rigged, because she should never... 
Chris, she should never have been allowed to run for the presidency based on what she did with e-mails and so many other things. 
What I'm saying is that I will tell you at the time.
I'll keep you in suspense.
OK?
Should have gotten it.
I think what the FBI did and what the Department of Justice did, including meeting with her husband, the attorney general, in the back of an airplane on the tarmac in Arizona, I think it's disgraceful.
I think it's a disgrace. 
I think we've never had a situation so bad in this country.
Let me tell you, Mosul is so sad.
We had Mosul.
But when she left, when she took everybody out, we lost Mosul.
Now we're fighting again to get Mosul.
The problem with Mosul and what they wanted to do is they wanted to get the leaders of ISIS who they felt were in Mosul.
About three months ago, I started reading that they want to get the leaders and they're going to attack Mosul.
Whatever happened to the element of surprise, OK?
We announce we're going after Mosul.
I have been reading about going after Mosul now for about -- how long is it, Hillary, three months?
These people have all left.
They've all left.
The element of surprise.
Douglas MacArthur, George Patton spinning in their graves when they see the stupidity of our country.
So we're now fighting for Mosul, that we had.
All she had to do was stay there, and now we're going in to get it.
But you know who the big winner in Mosul is going to be after we eventually get it?
And the only reason they did it is because she's running for the office of president and they want to look tough.
They want to look good.
He violated the red line in the sand, and he made so many mistakes, made all the mistakes.
That's why we have the great migration.
But she wanted to look good for the election.
So they're going in.
But who's going to get Mosul, really?
We'll take Mosul eventually.
But the way -- if you look at what's happening, much tougher than they thought.
Much, much tougher.
Much more dangerous.
Going to be more deaths that they thought.
But the leaders that we wanted to get are all gone because they're smart.
They say, what do we need this for?
So Mosul is going to be a wonderful thing.
And Iran should write us a letter of thank you, just like the really stupid -- the stupidest deal of all time, a deal that's going to give Iran absolutely nuclear weapons.
Iran should write us yet another letter saying thank you very much, because Iran, as I said many years ago, Iran is taking over Iraq, something they've wanted to do forever, but we've made it so easy for them.
So we're now going to take Mosul.
And do you know who's going to be the beneficiary?
Iran.
Oh, yeah, they're making -- I mean, they are outsmarting -- look, you're not there, you might be involved in that decision.
But you were there when you took everybody out of Mosul and out of Iraq.
You shouldn't have been in Iraq, but you did vote for it.
You shouldn't have been in Iraq, but once you were in Iraq, you should have never left the way. 
The point is, the big winner is going to be Iran. 
Wrong.
Wrong.
Wrong.
Chris, we don't gain anything. 
Iran is taking over Iraq.
Iran is taking over Iraq.
We don't gain anything.
If they did it by surprise
We could have gained if they did it by surprise.
No, you are the one that's unfit.
You know, WikiLeaks just actually came out -- John Podesta said some horrible things about you, and, boy, was he right.
He said some beauties.
And you know, Bernie Sanders, he said you have bad judgment.
You do.
And if you think that going into Mosul after we let the world know we're going in, and all of the people that we really wanted -- the leaders -- they're all gone.
If you think that was good, then you do.
Now, John Podesta said you have terrible instincts.
Bernie Sanders said you have bad judgment.
I agree with both. 
Which is a big mistake.
It's a catastrophe.
I mean...
... it's a mess.
Have you seen it?
Have you seen it?
Have you seen what's happening to Aleppo?
OK, so it hasn't fallen.
Take a look at it. 
That's right.
And they are being slaughtered...
... because of bad decisions.
Well, Aleppo is a disaster.
It's a humanitarian nightmare.
But it has fallen from the -- from any standpoint.
I mean, what do you need, a signed document?
Take a look at Aleppo.
It is so sad when you see what's happened.
And a lot of this is because of Hillary Clinton, because what's happened is, by fighting Assad, who turned out to be a lot tougher than she thought, and now she's going to say, oh, he loves Assad, she's -- he's just much tougher and much smarter than her and Obama.
And everyone thought he was gone two years ago, three years ago.
He -- he aligned with Russia.
He now also aligned with Iran, who we made very powerful.
We gave them $150 billion back.
We give them $1.7 billion in cash.
I mean, cash.
Bundles of cash as big as this stage.
We gave them $1.7 billion.
Now they have -- he has aligned with Russia and with Iran.
They don't want ISIS, but they have other things, because we're backing -- we're backing rebels.
We don't know who the rebels are.
We're giving them lots of money, lots of everything.
We don't know who the rebels are.
And when and if -- and it's not going to happen, because you have Russia and you have Iran now.
But if they ever did overthrow Assad, you might end up with -- as bad as Assad is, and he's a bad guy, but you may very well end up with worse than Assad.
If she did nothing, we'd be in much better shape.
And this is what's caused the great migration, where she's taking in tens of thousands of Syrian refugees, who probably in many cases -- not probably, who are definitely... 
... in many cases, ISIS-aligned, and we now have them in our country, and wait until you see -- this is going to be the great Trojan horse.
And wait until you see what happens in the coming years.
Lots of luck, Hillary.
Thanks a lot for doing a great job. 
But I just have to...
It's so ridiculous what she -- she will defeat ISIS.
We should have never let ISIS happen in the first place.
And right now, they're in 32 countries. 
We should have -- wait one second.
They had a cease-fire three weeks ago.
A cease-fire, the United States, Russia, and Syria.
And during the cease-fire, Russia took over vast swatches of land, and then they said we don't want the cease-fire anymore.
We are so outplayed on missiles, on cease-fires.
They are outplayed.
Now, she wasn't there.
I assume she had nothing to do with it.
But our country is so outplayed by Putin and Assad, and by the way -- and by Iran.
Nobody can believe how stupid our leadership is. 
Well, I say they're wrong, because I'm going to create tremendous jobs.
And we're bringing GDP from, really, 1 percent, which is what it is now, and if she got in, it will be less than zero.
But we're bringing it from 1 percent up to 4 percent.
And I actually think we can go higher than 4 percent.
I think you can go to 5 percent or 6 percent.
And if we do, you don't have to bother asking your question, because we have a tremendous machine.
We will have created a tremendous economic machine once again.
To do that, we're taking back jobs.
We're not going to let our companies be raided by other countries where we lose all our jobs, we don't make our product anymore.
It's very sad.
But I'm going to create a -- the kind of a country that we were from the standpoint of industry.
We used to be there.
We've given it up.
We've become very, very sloppy.
We've had people that are political hacks making the biggest deals in the world, bigger than companies.
You take these big companies, these trade deals are far bigger than these companies, and yet we don't use our great leaders, many of whom back me and many of whom back Hillary, I must say.
But we don't use those people.
Those are the people -- these are the greatest negotiators in the world.
We have the greatest businesspeople in the world.
We have to use them to negotiate our trade deals.
We use political hacks.
We use people that get the position because they gave -- they made a campaign contribution and they're dealing with China and people that are very much smarter than they are.
So we have to use our great people.
But that being said, we will create an economic machine the likes of which we haven't seen in many decades.
And people, Chris, will again go back to work and they'll make a lot of money.
And we'll have companies that will grow and expand and start from new. 
Yeah, yeah, we've heard -- we've heard this before, Hillary. 
We've heard this before.
Thank you, Hillary.
Could I just respond? 
Because I did disagree with Ronald Reagan very strongly on trade.
I disagreed with him.
We should have been much tougher on trade even then.
I've been waiting for years.
Nobody does it right.
And frankly, now we're going to do it right. 
I'm cutting taxes.
We're going to grow the economy.
It's going to grow at a record rate of growth.
No, it's going to totally help you.
And one thing we have to do: Repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare.
It's destroying our country.
It's destroying our businesses, our small business and our big businesses.
We have to repeal and replace Obamacare.
You take a look at the kind of numbers that that will cost us in the year '17, it is a disaster.
If we don't repeal and replace -- now, it's probably going to die of its own weight.
But Obamacare has to go.
It's -- the premiums are going up 60 percent, 70 percent, 80 percent.
Next year they're going to go up over 100 percent.
And I'm really glad that the premiums have started -- at least the people see what's happening, because she wants to keep Obamacare and she wants to make it even worse, and it can't get any worse.
Bad health care at the most expensive price.
We have to repeal and replace Obamacare. 
Such a nasty woman.
Your husband disagrees with you.
She's raising the money from the people she wants to control.
Doesn't work that way.
But when I started this campaign, I started it very strongly.
It's called "Make America Great Again."
We're going to make America great.
We have a depleted military.
It has to be helped, has to be fixed.
We have the greatest people on Earth in our military.
We don't take care of our veterans.
We take care of illegal immigrants, people that come into the country illegally, better than we take care of our vets.
That can't happen.
Our policemen and women are disrespected.
We need law and order, but we need justice, too.
Our inner cities are a disaster.
You get shot walking to the store.
They have no education.
They have no jobs.
I will do more for African-Americans and Latinos than she can ever do in 10 lifetimes.
All she's done is talk to the African-Americans and to the Latinos, but they get the vote, and then they come back, they say, we'll see you in four years.
We are going to make America strong again, and we are going to make America great again, and it has to start now.
We cannot take four more years of Barack Obama, and that's what you get when you get her. 
We are at a decisive moment in this election.
Last week, I laid out my plan to bring jobs back to our country.
Yesterday, I laid out my plan to defeat Radical Islamic Terrorism.
Tonight, I am going to talk about how to make our communities safe again from crime and lawlessness. 
Let me begin by thanking the law enforcement officers here in this city, and across this country, for their service and sacrifice in difficult times.
The violence, riots and destruction that have taken place in Milwaukee is an assault on the right of all citizens to live in security and peace.
Law and order must be restored.
It must be restored for the sake of all, but most especially the sake of those living in the affected communities.
The main victims of these riots are law-abiding African-American citizens living in these neighborhoods.
It is their jobs, their homes, their schools and communities which will suffer as a result.
There is no compassion in tolerating lawless conduct.
Crime and violence is an attack on the poor, and will never be accepted in a Trump Administration.
The narrative that has been pushed aggressively for years now by our current Administration, and pushed by my opponent Hillary Clinton, is a false one.
The problem in our poorest communities is not that there are too many police, the problem is that there are not enough police.
More law enforcement, more community engagement, more effective policing is what our country needs.
Just like Hillary Clinton is against the miners, she is against the police.
You know it, and I know it.
Those peddling the narrative of cops as a racist force in our society ... a narrative supported with a nod by my opponent ... share directly in the responsibility for the unrest in Milwaukee, and many other places within our country.
They have fostered the dangerous anti-police atmosphere in America.
Everytime we rush to judgment with false facts and narratives ... whether in Ferguson or in Baltimore ... and foment further unrest, we do a direct disservice to poor African-American residents who are hurt by the high crime in their communities.
During the last 72 hours, while protestors have raged against the police here in Milwaukee, another 9 were killed in Chicago and another 46 were wounded.
More than 2,600 people have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year, and almost 4,000 killed in President Obama's hometown area since his presidency began.
How are we serving these American victims by attacking law enforcement officers?
The war on our police must end.
It must end now.
The war on our police is a war on all peaceful citizens who want to be able to work and live and send their kids to school in safety.
Our job is not to make life more comfortable for the rioter, the looter, the violent disruptor.
Our job is to make life more comfortable for the African-American parent who wants their kids to be able to safely walk the streets.
Or the senior citizen waiting for a bus.
Or the young child walking home from school.
For every one violent protestor, there are a hundred moms and dads and kids on that same city block who just want to be able to sleep safely at night.
My opponent would rather protect the offender than the victim.
Hillary Clinton-backed policies are responsible for the problems in the inner cities today, and a vote for her is a vote for another generation of poverty, high crime, and lost opportunities.
I care too much about my country to let that happen.
We all care too much about our country to let that happen.
Good policing saves lives.
My dear friend, Rudy Giuliani, knows a thing or two about this.
The policies put into place by Rudy ultimately brought down crime by 76 percent and murder by 84 percent.
Think of how many families were saved, how much heartache was prevented, when police were put into communities and criminals were removed.
Imagine how many lives could have been saved, all across this country, if Democratic politicians hadn't blocked in their cities what Rudy did in New York City?
I'll make sure we deliver safe neighborhoods here in Milwaukee, and all across this country.
It's easy for Hillary Clinton to turn a blind eye to crime when she has her own private security force.
I believe all Americans, not just the powerful, are entitled to security.
Hillary Clinton has had her chance.
She failed.
Now it's time for new leadership.
The Hillary Clinton agenda hurts poor people the most.
There is no compassion in allowing drug dealers, gang members, and felons to prey on innocent people.
It is the first duty of government to keep the innocent safe, and when I am President I will fight for the safety of every American ... and especially those Americans who have not known safety for a very, very long time.
I am asking for the vote of every African-American citizen struggling in our country today who wants a different future.
It is time for our society to address some honest and very difficult truths.
The Democratic Party has failed and betrayed the African-American community.
Democratic crime policies, education policies, and economic policies have produced only more crime, more broken homes, and more poverty.
Let us look at the situation right here in Milwaukee, a city run by Democrats for decade after decade.
Last year, killings in this city increased by 69 percent, plus another 634 victims of non-fatal shootings.
18-29-year-olds accounted for nearly half of the homicide victims.
The poverty rate here is nearly double the national average.
Almost 4 in 10 African-American men in Milwaukee between the ages of 25-54 do not have a job.
Nearly four in 10 single mother households are living in poverty.
55 public schools in this city have been rated as failing to meet expectations, despite ten thousand dollars in funding per-pupil.
There is only a 60% graduation rate, and it's one of the worst public school systems in the country.
1 in 5 manufacturing jobs has disappeared in Milwaukee since we fully opened our markets to China, and many African-American neighborhoods have borne the brunt of this hit.
To every voter in Milwaukee, to every voter living in every inner city, or every forgotten stretch of our society, I am running to offer you a better future.
The Democratic Party has taken the votes of African-Americans for granted.
They've just assumed they'll get your support and done nothing in return for it.
It's time to give the Democrats some competition for these votes, and it's time to rebuild the inner cities of America ... and to reject the failed leadership of a rigged political system.
I'm not part of the corrupt system.
In fact, the corrupt system is trying to stop me.
I've been paying my own way.
The voters in the Republican Party this year defied the donors, the consultants, the power brokers, and choose a nominee from outside our failed and corrupt and broken system.
The other party ... the Democratic Party ... nominated the personification of special interest corruption.
The Democratic Party rigged the nomination to give it to Hillary Clinton, thus giving the soul of their party this year to the special interests.
I am running to listen to your voice, to hear your cries for help.
The quiet voices in our society, not the loudest demonstrators, need to have their demands heard.
Jobs.
Safety.
Opportunity.
Fair and equal representation.
We reject the bigotry of Hillary Clinton which panders to and talks down to communities of color and sees them only as votes, not as individual human beings worthy of a better future.
She doesn't care at all about the hurting people of this country, or the suffering she has caused them.
The African-American community has been taken for granted for decades by the Democratic Party.
It's time to break with the failures of the past ...
I want to offer Americans a new future.
It is time for rule by the people, not rule by special interests.
Every insider, getting rich off of our broken system, is throwing money at Hillary Clinton.
The hedge fund managers, the Wall Street investors, the professional political class.
It's the powerful protecting the powerful.
Insiders fighting for insiders.
I am fighting for you.
When we talk about the insider, who are we talking about?
It's the comfortable politicians looking out for their own interests.
It's the lobbyists who know how to insert that perfect loophole into every bill.
It's the financial industry that knows how to regulate their competition out of existence.
The insiders also include the media executives, anchors and journalists in Washington, Los Angeles, and New York City, who are part of the same failed status quo and want nothing to change.
Every day you pick up a newspaper, or turn on the nightly news, and you hear about some self-interest banker or some discredited Washington insider says they oppose our campaign.
Or some encrusted old politician says they oppose our campaign.
Or some big time lobbyist says they oppose our campaign.
I wear their opposition as a badge of honor.
Because it means I am fighting for REAL change, not just partisan change.
I am fighting ... all of us across the country are fighting ... for peaceful regime change in our own country.
The media-donor-political complex that's bled this country dry has to be replaced with a new government of, by and for the people.
The leadership class in Washington D.C., of which Hillary Clinton has been a member for thirty years, has abandoned the people of this country.
I am going to give the people their voice back.
Think about it.
The people opposing our campaign are the same people who have left our border open and let innocent people suffer as a result.
The people opposing our campaign are the same people who have led us into one disastrous foreign war after another.
The people opposing our campaign are the same people who lied to us about one trade deal after another.
Aren't you tired of a system that gets rich at your expense?
Aren't you tired of big media, big businesses, and big donors rigging the system to keep your voice from being heard?
Are you ready for change?
Are you ready for leadership that puts you, the American people, first?
That puts your country first?
That puts your family first?
Let's talk about what this means for the inner cities of America.
It's time to break through the television noise, the entrenched interests.
I understand that a lot of powerful people in our political system ... a lot of people who've created our problems ... will lose a lot of their contracts, and their special gigs, if African-American voters, and all minority voters, support my campaign.
It's time to stop making the special interests rich.
It's time to make the American people rich.
I am going to Make America Wealthy again.
The Democratic Party has run nearly every inner city in this country for 50 years, and run them into financial ruin.
They've ruined the schools.
They've driven out the jobs.
They've tolerated a level of crime no American should consider acceptable.
Violent crime has risen 17% in America's 50 largest cities last year.
Killings of police officers this year is up nearly 50 percent.
Homicides are up more than 60% in Baltimore.
They are up more than 50% in Washington, D.C.
This is the future offered by Hillary Clinton.
More poverty, more crime, and more of the same.
The future she offers is the most pessimistic thing I can possibly imagine.
It is time for a different future.
Here is what I am proposing.
First, on immigration.
No community in this country has been hurt worse by Hillary Clinton's immigration policies than the African-American community.
Now she is proposing to print instant work permits for millions of illegal immigrants, taking jobs directly from low-income Americans.
I will secure our border, protect our workers, and improve jobs and wages in your community.
We will only invite people to join our country who share our tolerant values, who support our Constitution, and who love all of our people.
On trade, I am going to renegotiate NAFTA, stand up to China, withdraw from the TPP, and protect every last American job.
On taxes, I am going to give a massive tax cut to every worker and small business in this country, bring thousands of new companies and millions of new jobs onto our shores ... and make it very difficult for our businesses to leave.
I am going to reform our regulations so jobs stay in America, and new businesses come to America to hire workers right here in Milwaukee.
Every policy my opponent has sends jobs overseas.
I am going to bring trillions in new wealth back to the United States.
On education, it is time to have school choice, merit pay for teachers, and to end the tenure policies that hurt good teachers and reward bad teachers.
We are going to put students and parents first.
Hillary Clinton would rather deny opportunities to millions of young African-American children, just so she can curry favor with the education bureaucracy.
I am going to allow charter schools to thrive, and help young kids get on the American ladder of success: a good education, and a good-paying job.
On crime, I am going to support more police in our communities, appoint the best prosecutors and judges in the country, pursue strong enforcement of federal laws, and I am going to break up the gangs, the cartels and criminal syndicates terrorizing our neighborhoods.
To every lawbreaker hurting innocent people in this country, I say: your free reign will soon come crashing to an end.
On healthcare, we are going to get rid of Obamacare ... which has caused soaring double-digit premium increases ... and give choice to patients and consumers.
Aetna, just today, announced they are dropping out ... as are many of the major insurance companies.
On government corruption, I am going to restore honor to our government.
We've seen the corruption of Hillary Clinton, the mass email deletions, the pay-for-play at the State Department, the profiteering, the favors given to foreign corporations and governments at your expense.
We've seen a former Secretary of State lie to Congress about her illegal email scheme, risk innocent American lives, and bring dishonor onto our government.
In my Administration, I am going to enforce all laws concerning the protection of classified information.
No one will be above the law.
I am going to forbid senior officials from trading favors for cash by preventing them from collecting lavish speaking fees through their spouses when they serve.
I am going to ask my senior officials to sign an agreement not to accept speaking fees from corporations with a registered lobbyist for five years after leaving office, or from any entity tied to a foreign government.
This is all just the beginning.
We are going to make this a government of the people once again.
This is our chance to take back power from all the people who've taken it from you.
The reason you see the establishment media lining up behind my opponent is because they are scared that you, with your vote, can take away their power and return it to your family and community.
These are tough times.
But I know we can make American Greater Than Ever Before.
To do this, we are going to need a fighter in the White House.
I will be your fighter.
To defeat crime and Radical Islamic Terrorism in our country, to win trade in our country, you need tremendous physical and mental strength and stamina.
Hillary Clinton doesn't have that strength and stamina.
She cannot win for you.
Most importantly, she has bad judgment.
Bad judgment on terrorism, bad judgement on foreign policy, bad judgment on trade.
The only individuals she's ever delivered for is her donors ... not the people.
I've said it before, and I'll say it again.
My opponent asks her supporters to repeat a three-word pledge.
Her pledge reads: "I'm With Her"
I choose to recite a different pledge.
My pledge reads: "I'm With You ... the American people."
I will fight to ensure that every American is treated equally, protected equally, and honored equally.
We will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms, and seek a new future of security, prosperity and opportunity ... a future built on our common culture and values as one American people.
I am asking for your vote so I can be your champion in the White House.
We will once again be a country of law and order, and a country of great success.
To every parent who dreams for their children, and to every child who dreams for their future, I say these words to you tonight: I'm with you, I will fight for you, and I will win for you.
Together, We will make America strong again.
We will make American safe again.
And we will make America great again.
Thank you, and God Bless.
Colorado is home to six military bases.
We are going to eliminate the defense sequester and rebuild our military.
Another great Colorado legacy is hunting and fishing.
We are going to conserve your land for future generations, and we are going to save the 2nd amendment.
One other issue of such great importance in Colorado is energy.
Hillary Clinton wants to shut down the mines, and shut down shale, oil, and natural gas.
We are going to end the war on American energy, and we are going to put the miners back to work.
I have also made a center piece of my economic revitalization plan the largest middle class tax cut since Ronald Reagan ...and the largest regulatory reform in American history.
That is because I know how overtaxed and overregulated the working people of this country are.
A central issue I would like to address today is our broken tax code, an issue of concern to all Americans.
Along with securing our borders, rebuilding our military, keeping us safe from terrorism, redoing our trade deals and bringing back jobs, fixing the tax code is one of the main reasons I'm running for President.
I've been saying from the beginning of this campaign how ridiculous, complex and yes, unfair, our tax system is.
This is not the fault of the IRS, but the political class that is owned outright by the special interests and lobbyists.
It is these politicians who wrote the tax code, and who are constantly adding, revising, and changing, an already over-complicated set of laws ... all at the behest of their favored donors and special interests.
It's thousands of pages long, and almost no one understands it.
The average American would need an army of accountants and lawyers to wade their way through it.
Many so-called experts, due to the sheer size and complexity of the code, don't have a clue what these pages represent.
The unfairness of the tax laws is unbelievable, it's something I've been talking about for a long time ... despite being a beneficiary.
I understand the tax laws better than almost anyone, which is why I am the one who can fix them ... and that is what I commit to doing.
As a businessman and real estate developer, I have legally used the tax laws to my benefit, and to the benefit of my company and my employees.
I have often said on the campaign trail, that I have a fiduciary responsibility to pay no more tax than legally required ... or, put another way, to pay as little tax as legally possible.
As a major real estate developer in this country, and throughout the world, I face enormous taxes: city taxes, state taxes, sales and excise taxes, employee taxes, and federal taxes.
It's my job to minimize the overall tax burden to the greatest extent possible ... which allows me to reinvest in neighborhoods, workers, and build amazing properties which fuel tremendous growth in their communities ... and always help our great providers of jobs, the small business.
The news media is now obsessed with an alleged tax filing from the 1990's, at the end of one of the most brutal economic downturns in our country's history.
The conditions facing real estate developers in the early nineties were almost as bad as the Great Depression of 1929 and far worse than the Great Recession of 2008.
What had been a booming economy in the era of Ronald Reagan changed dramatically ... and the business landscape changed with it: Bank failures, the collapse of the Savings &amp; Loan industry, and the implosion of the retail market, and real estate in general.
Many business people, including many of my competitors, were not able to survive.
Companies, jobs, and opportunities were lost ... and lives were destroyed, as tens of thousands of people were put out of work.
Some of the biggest and strongest people and companies went bankrupt.
Yet today, my company is bigger, stronger, with far greater assets, and more premium properties, than ever before.
That did not happen by chance or luck ... it happened by action, and talent.
I was able to use the tax laws of this country, and my business acumen, to dig out of this real estate depression when few others did.
In those most difficult times, when so many had their backs to the wall, I reached within myself and delivered for my company, my employees, my family and the communities where my properties existed.
Those who spend their entire lives within the confines of government work, and who know virtually nothing of business, fail to understand the skill, dedication, and sheer grit it takes for a company to climb out of an economic depression of the scale we had in the early nineties.
People like my opponent Hillary Clinton, whose only method of making money is by selling 
government favors and granting access to special interests, know nothing about how businesses succeed and grow.
Hillary Clinton has never created a single job in her entire life ... or added a single dollar of value to the American economy.
Hillary Clinton hasn't made an honest dollar in her entire life ... all she does is take from you, from our country, and peddles influence to donors, special interests, and foreign actors ... for astronomical dollars and like never before.
It's corruption of the highest order.
While I made my money as a highly-successful private businessman following the law, Hillary Clinton made her money as a corrupt public official breaking the law and putting her government office up for sale.
By her own account, Hillary Clinton left the White House dead broke, and now she and her husband have made more than $200 million dollars ... without building a company, or creating a single thing of value. 
During the early nineties, as companies were collapsing left and right, the media and powers that be said Donald Trump could never make it back.
They said I had billions of dollars in borrowing, and hundreds of millions in personal guarantees, and no pathway out.
But, I never had any doubts and never gave up.
That's because I knew in my heart that when the chips are down is when I perform at my very best.
And when people make the mistake of underestimating me, that's when they are in for their biggest surprise.
Just look at what happened in the primary.
Just look at what our incredible movement is doing right now.
The reason I never felt endangered during the real estate downturn, was that I knew myself, I knew my business, I knew the financial system, I knew the tax code and, most importantly, I knew how to fight.
That's what I am ... a fighter, and I am now going to fight for you.
With my knowledge, I knew that I would make a comeback in business.
That is why I am here today.
That is why I have left private business for public life ... because I 
understand our country is in very bad shape.
And now our country is in need of a major comeback ... it needs one now more than ever.
We owe $20 trillion dollars in debt, but that's only part of the story ... we have over $100 trillion dollars in unfunded liabilities, and we have a budget that's out of control with annual deficits.
In addition, because of the incompetence of our leaders, we run massive trade deficits on an annual basis, now almost $800 billion a year.
Our country is broke.
We have decaying infrastructure, failing schools, rising crime, a depleted military, an open border, and an economy that can't create full-time high-paying jobs.
We are a divided nation, and each week it seems we are getting more and more divided, with race riots in our streets on a 
monthly basis.
This is not the America that was handed down to us, and it's not the America we want for our children.
And it's certainly not the America we want to pass down to our grandchildren.
But this is the America we will have if we don't turn things around ... starting today.
What I say is not lost on the American people, because 70% of you believe our country is headed in the wrong direction.
We cannot have another 4 years of Barack Obama, and Hillary Clinton will be worse.
We can turn this all around ... but not if we don't make a change in leadership RIGHT NOW.
The failed political establishment must go ... it must go for the sake of your country, your future, and those you love the most.
In the early 90's, they splashed the front pages with stories about how I was finished.
Everybody said that I was done ... there were front page articles in the Wall Street Journal and New York Times.
They were thrilled and delighted to write these negative stories.
So they said I was finished.
The only person who didn't think that I was in trouble was Donald Trump.
I started my company with a small loan and, as I grew, I borrowed money to grow the company.
When the bottom fell out of the Real Estate market, I had all the debt, it stayed the same ... but the value of the assets plummeted.
But I knew how to use the tax code to rebuild my company when others did not.
My understanding of the tax code gave me a big advantage over those who didn't have a clue, including many of my competitors who lost everything they had, never to be heard from again.
Now, they're gone, and I'm here and I'm ready to turn things around for this country.
The early 90's was a very tough time for the world, but in tough times you need tough people.
These are tough times for America today, and we need tough leaders.
Not people who tell you what you want to hear, but people who tell you what you need to hear: we must never allow corrupt career politicians, like the Clintons, ever back into the White House again.
These tough times were when I performed my very best.
The economy and banks collapsing, the government was a mess ... but I enjoyed waking up every day to go to battle.
I enjoyed getting up every morning to take on the financial establishment on behalf of my company and win.
That's the thinking we need for our country ... that's the thinking we need when we are negotiating trade deals, and military deals, and economic deals on behalf of the American people.
Put me into the boardroom as YOUR representative, and I will deliver for you.
Hillary Clinton is in it only for herself and her donors.
I am here fighting for America.
Many people have said that I perform better under pressure than anyone they've ever seen ...
I've proven that over and over again.
That's what I do.
When the pressure is on, when the odds are stacked against me, when people say it can't be done ... that's when I am just getting started.
The thing that motivates me the most is when people tell me something is impossible.
For me, impossible is just a starting point.
From the depths of that terrible real estate depression, I created a company worth billions and billions of dollars and created tens of thousands of jobs.
Our company, and our employees, remade skylines, revitalized neighborhoods, rejuvenated communities, and hired thousands of workers.
On November 8th, America's comeback begins ... and we are going to rise up from our present challenges bigger and better and stronger than ever before.
The people here in Pueblo know what it takes to rebuild this country.
This is a city with a rich immigrant history, and a rich Latino history, that has contributed so much to this country and this state.
Though the people of Pueblo, and their families, have hailed from all regions of the world, you are united by this one thing: You are all Americans.
And, as Americans, you are entitled to the same protections as every other American.
Everyone lawfully living inside of our borders are entitled to the same things: safe communities, a great education, and access to high-paying jobs.
This is the change I will deliver.
Hillary Clinton has been there for 30 years and delivered nothing but failure.
Her policies have brought death and destruction overseas, and poverty at home.
She's brought massive poverty for everyone, but especially African-American and Hispanic Citizens.
She opposes school choice, and wants to trap poor African-American and Hispanic children in failing government schools.
We are going to get poor minority children out of failing schools and into the public, private, charter or magnet school of their choice.
Hillary Clinton supports Obamacare, and wants to expand it ... Obamacare is an absolute disaster.
Premiums in Colorado are set to go up another 20 percent ... the only way to stop this disaster is to vote Trump.
Hillary Clinton also supports the terrible trade deals, like Bill Clinton's NAFTA and China's entry into the World Trade Organization ... and next she wants the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the deal she calls the "Gold Standard."
Colorado has lost more than 1 in 7 manufacturing jobs since the NAFTA and China deals.
But while you've lost out, Hillary Clinton has raked in cash from her contributors.
She and Bill have made $150 million in speeches to special interests.
They gave 39 speeches to Big Banks, including $2 million in speaking fees from Goldman Sachs.
The Clintons received another $2 million from a Swiss Bank after Hillary negotiated a favorable settlement for them as Secretary of State.
To hide her corruption, Hillary Clinton put her emails on an illegal secret server open to foreign hacking.
Then she deleted and bleached 33,000 emails ... after a congressional subpoena -- to hide them from the public.
She lies to Congress, under oath, and her ringleaders took the fifth amendment and got immunity deals.
It's worse than Watergate.
The investigation of Hillary Clinton was rigged, and it's a shame, and it's one of the saddest things that have ever taken place in our nation.
We have become a Banana Republic.
Now, today, we learned, that the FBI made a side deal with Clinton's top aides to DESTROY 
their laptops.
Let me repeat that: the FBI reportedly made a deal to DESTROY the laptops of government officials implicated in a massive criminal cover-up.
Hillary Clinton is the ringleader of a criminal enterprise that has corrupted our government at the highest levels, and the American people have one chance to stop it ... by showing up and voting on November 8th.
People have had it with the years, the decades of Clinton Corruption.
This is the year the American people say: Enough is Enough.
The Clintons are the sordid past.
We are the bright future.
Now, another issue I want to address today is immigration.
As I mentioned, Pueblo is filled with wonderful hardworking immigrants.
It is these hardworking immigrants who stand to lose the most from our open borders immigration policy.
Illegal immigration, and broken visa programs, take jobs directly from Hispanic workers living here lawfully today.
Illegal immigration also brings with it massive crime, and massive drugs ... including a terrible heroin problem right here in Colorado.
We are going to build a border wall, and we are going to stop the drugs, gangs and the violence from pouring into Colorado.
We are going to shut down the Sanctuary Cities that have led to the preventable deaths of so many.
Cases like Kate Steinle, murdered in San Francisco by a 5-time deported illegal immigrant.
Or cases like Sarah Root, killed by an illegal immigrant released at the border by President Obama ... and then released again after the killing.
There are over 2 million criminal aliens in this county, and we are going to get them out ... and we are going to get them out quickly.
To the cartels, the gangs, the drug dealers, I have a simple message for you: your days are numbered, and your reign of crime will soon come crashing to an end.
We also have to keep our country safe from terrorism.
The terrorists who planted the bombs in New York and Jersey, and who carried out the mall stabbing in Minnesota, were foreign nationals admitted into our country ... as was the mall shooter in Washington.
Or look at cases like the Boston Bombers, here on asylum, or the San Bernardino Shooter, here on a fianc.. visa from Saudi Arabia.
Or the Orlando shooter, the son of a Taliban supporter from Afghanistan.
Terrorists are infiltrating our country.
Now, Hillary Clinton wants a 550% increase in Syrian refugees and countless more refugees 
from across the Middle East.
I want to keep you and your family safe.
My job is not to represent foreign countries.
My job is to represent the citizens of the United States of America ... putting your jobs, your wages, and your security first.
If you are living in the United States today as a lawful resident or U.S. citizen, I will ensure you have a safe community, rising wages, and secure immigration system.
Immigration Security is National Security.
Here are some more things we will do starting in 2017 ...
We are going to lower your taxes; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; repeal and replace job-killing Obamacare; make childcare more affordable; save the 2nd amendment; support the men and women of law enforcement; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
We are going to rebuild America.
We are going to revitalize America.
And we are going to unite America.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
Together, we will make America wealthy again.
We will make America strong again.
We will make America safe again.
And we will make America great again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
Before we get started with our Q &amp; A, I'd like to address one of the most important aspects of America's national security, and that's Cyber Security.
To truly make America safe, we must make cybersecurity a major priority for both the government and the private sector.
Cyber theft is the fastest growing crime in the United States.
As President, improving cyber security will be an immediate and top priority for my Administration.
One of the very first things I will do is to order a thorough review of our cyber defenses and weaknesses, including all vital infrastructure.
Cyber-attacks from foreign governments, especially China, Russia, and North Korea along with non-state terrorist actors and organized criminal groups, constitute one of our most critical national security concerns.
Hillary Clinton's only experience in cyber security involves her criminal scheme to violate federal law, engineering a massive cover-up, and putting the entire nation in harm's way.
The fact that a former Senator and Secretary of State claimed not to know what the letter "C" means is just one more example of why she's unfit to hold public office.
The scope of our cyber security problem is enormous.
Our government, our businesses, our trade secrets, and our citizens' most sensitive information are all facing constant cyber attacks.
Just consider some of these recent hacks:
JP Morgan Chase had 73 million emails stolen.
E-Bay was invaded and gave up 150 million passwords.
Target was attacked and gave up 40 million credit card numbers.
Attacks like these are happening on a regular basis both in the United States and around the world, and the costs in our privacy, our security and on our financial sector are extraordinary.
Identify theft, financial laundering, as well as ransom ware ... involving the extortion of a hacked institution ... are all becoming increasingly common.
Incredibly, hackers were able to obtain at least 20 million identities of people who underwent FBI background investigations.
The information hacked contains facts discovered by the FBI in doing background checks for people seeking positions with the Federal Government.
It is a treasure trove which can be easily used for blackmail.
The fact that this highly classified information was so poorly protected demonstrates that cyber security is just one more area where the Obama Administration has failed.
We should not let this be like the history of the Mafia which was allowed to grow into a nation-wide organization which infiltrated and corrupted so many areas of society for such a long time.
We can learn from this history that when the Department of Justice, the FBI, the DEA and state and local police and prosecutors were combined in Task Forces directed at the Mafia, they were able to have great success in prosecuting them, seizing their business interests and removing their infiltration from legitimate areas of society.
As President, I will instruct the Department of Justice to create Joint Task Forces throughout the United States to work together with Federal, State, and local law enforcement authorities and international law enforcement to crush this still-developing area of crime.
I will make certain that our military is the best in the world in both cyber offense and defense.
I will also ask my Secretary of Defense and Joint Chiefs to present recommendations for strengthening and augmenting our Cyber Command.
As a deterrent against attacks on our critical resources, the United States must possess the unquestioned capacity to launch crippling cyber counter-attacks.
This is the warfare of the future, America's dominance in this arena must be unquestioned.
Cyber security is not only a question of developing defensive technologies but offensive technologies as well.
For non-state terror actors, the United States must develop the ability ... no matter how difficult ... to track down and incapacitate those responsible.
We should turn cyber warfare into one of our greatest weapons against the terrorists.
To enhance the defense of the other agencies of government, including our law enforcement agencies, we will put together a team of the best military, civilian and private sector cyber security experts to comprehensively review all of our cyber security systems and technology.
The Cyber Review Team will proceed with the most sensitive systems first, but ultimately all systems will be analyzed and made as secure as modern technology permits.
I will also require that follow-up reviews take place on a regular basis determined by the sensitive nature of the security involved.
The review will include providing exact recommendations for the best combination of defensive technologies tailored to specific agencies.
This will include the various methods of internal monitoring, attack and penetration, investigation of suspected hackers or rogue employees, and identity protection for government employees.
The review team will also remain current on the constantly-evolving new methods of attack, and will attempt to anticipate them and develop defenses as often as possible before major breaches occur.
This group of experts will set up protocols for each agency and government officials, requiring them to follow best practices.
They will also establish a training program for all government employees to make certain they understand what defenses are available and utilize them, along with a continuing education program so everyone is aware of the newest methods of both attack and defense.
Those who violate classification rules will be held responsible to the fullest extent of the law.
I will appoint an Attorney General who will reform the Department of Justice like it was necessary after Watergate.
My Attorney General will restore the integrity of the Department of Justice.
Today is just the beginning of a long and overdue national discussion of how to protect ourselves from modern cyber-crime and evolving national security threats, and how to develop the cyber offense strategies necessary to gain a critical security edge in the 21st century.
In 35 days, we are going to win this state and we are going to win the White House.
I am going to make America Rich again.
I am going to end illegal immigration, stop the massive inflow of refugees, keep jobs from pouring out of our country, renegotiate our disastrous trade deals, and massively reduce taxes and regulations on our workers and our small businesses.
My economic agenda is very simple: jobs, jobs, jobs.
I want to send our best wishes to the great governor Mike Pence, as he prepares for his debate tonight.
The debate will be a contrast between our campaign of big ideas and bold solutions for tomorrow, versus the small and petty Clinton campaign that is stuck in the past.
We are change ... she is four more years of Obama.
Clinton can't talk about the real problems facing our country because she's the one who helped create all of our problems in the first place.
To hide her corruption, she deleted 33,000 emails after a congressional subpoena.
Hillary Clinton has been there for 30 years, and hasn't fixed anything.
In fact, she's just made things worse ... she failed upstate New York, promising to create 200,000 jobs, but manufacturing is down almost 40 percent.
She failed overseas, unleashing death and destruction.
And she failed Latinos and African-Americans, producing only more poverty in the inner cities.
Now, after years of failure, she complains about how I've used the tax laws to my benefit.
Then why didn't she ever try to change those laws so I could not have used them the way I did?
She could have changed those laws when she was in the Senate.
The reason that she did not is that her donors and contributors have used those tax laws the same as I did.
I know all their names, and I know who they are, but it's not up to me to make them public figures.
Two public Hillary supporters who are known are George Soros, who declared losses of $1.5 billion in just six months, and Warren Buffet who, in 2014, declared losses of $873 million.
I know how the tax code works better than anyone, and I am going to fix it so it is fair, and just, and works for you and your family.
I've made my money as a highly-successful private businessperson following the law.
Hillary Clinton made her money as a corrupt public official violating the law and selling her government office.
The problems we face as a country are immense, and it is going to take bold action to turn things around.
Right now, we owe $20 trillion in debt.
It doubled under President Obama.
Our infrastructure is like that of a third-world country.
The homicide rate last year experienced its largest single-year increase in 45 years.
Our border is wide open, and drugs and criminal cartels our pouring into the country.
Thousands of refugees are being admitted, with no way to screen them, and are instantly made eligible for welfare and free healthcare ... even as our own Veterans die waiting for the medical care they need.
Our annual trade deficit with the world is nearly $800 billion a year.
The federal budget is a disaster.
Our State Department, mostly under the watch of Hillary Clinton, misplaced or lost $6 billion in taxpayer funds.
We have the worst so-called recovery since the Great Depression.
We are nation divided, with race riots in the streets.
Our college students graduate, loaded with debt, only to discover they can't find jobs ... or certainly not the jobs they want.
Overseas, our failed leaders have empowered Iran, unleashed ISIS, and turned Iraq, Libya and Syria into absolute chaos.
Our allies aren't paying their fair share, foreign countries like Russia and China do not respect us, and our taxpaying citizens send troops and foreign aid all over the world even as their own cities can't provide the most basic services.
America needs a turnaround.
America needs a comeback.
America needs a change.
That is why I am running.
First, we are going to repeal and replace Obamacare.
The architect of Obamacare, Jonathan Gruber, admitted that the whole sales pitch was a lie ... he called it the "stupidity of the American voter."
But the only stupidity was the stupidity of our leaders who passed this disaster into law over the objections of the American people.
Do you remember all the lies?
President Obama said if you like your doctor you can keep your doctor.
He promised his plan would reduce premiums by $2,500 dollars.
Instead, they surged $5,000.
Now, of all people, President Bill Clinton has come out and told the truth about Obamacare.
He has absolutely trashed President Obama's signature legislation.
Remember, Hillary Clinton called Obamacare "one of the greatest accomplishments of President Obama, of the Democratic Party of our country."
Bill has a different view.
Here is what bill said:
He just said it's a "crazy system," where people end up with "premiums doubled and coverage cut in half."
He said "it's the craziest thing in the world."
Bill Clinton said:
"people out there [are] busting it, sometimes 60 hours a week, [and] wind up with their premiums doubled and their coverage cut in half...the people getting killed in this deal are the small business people and the individuals who make just a bit too much money to get any of these subsidies."
Clinton added that it "doesn't make any sense," and that "the insurance model doesn't work."
I couldn't agree more.
Which is why, on my first day in office, I am going to ask a Republican Congress to send me a bill to immediately repeal and replace Obamacare.
This is essential for Arizona.
Because of Obamacare, most of the state will only have 1 carrier next year, and premiums are expected to go up by 49% next year.
There is only 1 way to stop it: to vote for Trump.
Early ballots are mailed out on October 12th, and you need to mail them back in as early as you possibly can.
Next, we are going to unleash American energy
I just met with energy producers in Colorado, and they are pleading with the government to let them create jobs and wealth in the United States.
As part our plan to reach 4% growth and create at least 25 million new jobs, we are going to lift the restrictions on shale, oil, natural gas, clean coal, and all forms of job-producing American energy.
Fixing our trade deals will be the foundation of our economic revival
China, Japan, and Europe are printing huge sums of money ... the devaluation of currencies is staggering as to what it represents for our country, our businesses, and our citizens.
We're not on a level playing field, and our politicians don't understand what is going on.
Our jobs are being lost in massive numbers, and we are not making things in America anymore.
Too much is being made in other countries.
When I am President, we will start making things in America again.
Companies like Apple, will start making their computers and iPhones in our country.
Our nation has lost one-third of its manufacturing jobs since Bill Clinton's NAFTA ... a deal supported by Hillary Clinton.
Hillary's Korea deal also cost us another 100,000 jobs.
Since China entered the World Trade Organization ... another Bill and Hillary-backed deal ... 70,000 factories have shut down or left the United States.
That's 15 factories closing a day, on average.
Never in history has a country surrendered so much of its wealth to foreign countries.
As the factories leave, our money leaves with them.
Stores close, schools suffer, the tax base erodes, wages fall and the quality of life declines.
We've rebuilt other countries at the expense of our own.
Companies like Carrier, General Electric, Motorola, Mattel, Fiat Chrysler, and so many others are moving their jobs to Mexico, and to other countries.
And now, Ford has announced it's moving all of its small car production to Mexico also.
We are going to renegotiate NAFTA and if we don't get the deal we want, we will withdraw from NAFTA and start over to get a much better deal for our workers.
We are also going to stand up to foreign currency manipulation, and apply tariffs to countries that cheat.
Jobs will leave from other countries and come into the United States.
Factories will come rushing in, our schools and communities will be revitalized, and our poorest citizens will get new jobs and higher pay ...and new hope.
But to be a rich nation, we must also be a secure nation.
Security begins at the border.
A nation that doesn't control is borders is not a nation.
A country that doesn't protect its people isn't a country.
A government that doesn't put its own citizens first is a government unworthy and unfit to lead.
Here are some heartbreaking examples of how our government has failed our citizens.
Countless Americans who have died in recent years would be alive today if not for the open border policies of this Administration.
This includes incredible Americans like 21-year-old Sarah Root.
The man who killed her arrived at the border, entered federal custody, and then was released into a U.S. community under the policies of this White House.
He was released again after the crime, and is now at large.
Sarah had graduated from college with a 4.0, top of her class, the day before.
Also among the victims of the Obama-Clinton open borders policies was Grant Ronnebeck, a 21 year-old convenience store clerk in Mesa, Arizona.
He was murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member previously convicted of burglary who had also been released from Federal Custody.
Another victim is Kate Steinle, gunned down in the Sanctuary City of San Francisco by an illegal immigrant deported five previous times.
Then there is the case of 90 year-old Earl Olander, who was brutally beaten and left to bleed to death in his home.
The perpetrators were illegal immigrants with criminal records who did not meet the Obama Administration's priorities for removal.
In California, a 64-yeard old Air Force Veteran, Marilyn Pharis, was sexually assaulted and beaten to death with a hammer.
Her killer had been arrested on multiple occasions, but was never deported.
Also in California, my good friend, Jamiel Shaw, lost his amazing son at the age of 17 ... he was viciously shot and killed by an illegal immigrant with three gun charges, as well as battery of a police officer ... but despite these previous crimes, he had not been deported.
A 2011 report from the Government Accountability Office found that illegal immigrants and other non-citizens in our prisons and jails together had around 25,000 homicide arrests to their names.
There are more than 2 million criminal aliens in the county right now ... when I am President, we are getting them out, and quickly.
On top of that, illegal immigration costs our country more than $113 billion a year.
For the money we are going to spend on illegal immigration over the next ten years, we could provide one million at-risk students with a school voucher.
At the same time, our country is being infiltrated by terrorists.
Just yesterday, an immigrant from Bangladesh was charged in another ISIS plot.
Hundreds of immigrants from high-risk regions have been implicated in terrorism inside the United States since 9/11.
The terrorists who planted the bombs in New York and Jersey, and who carried out the mall stabbing in Minnesota, were foreign nationals admitted into our country ... as was the mall shooter in Washington.
Or look at cases like the Boston Bombers, here on asylum, or the San Bernardino Shooter, here on a fianc.. visa from Saudi Arabia.
Or the Orlando shooter, the son of a Taliban supporter from Afghanistan.
I am going to keep the terrorists out of our country.
Hillary Clinton wants a 550% increase in Syrian Refugees.
Hillary is for open borders.
I am not running to be President of the world.
I am running to be President of the United States.
I am for America First.
For the first time in American history, we have the endorsement of our ICE officers and our Border Patrol officers.
We also have the endorsement of Sheriff Joe.
We are going to build a border wall, enforce our laws, and keep our people safe.
The chaos, the violence and the crime will come to an end ... beginning in January of 2017.
We are going to end the government corruption
Hillary Clinton put her emails on an illegal secret server open to foreign hacking.
Then she bleached and destroyed 33,000 emails ... after a congressional subpoena.
She lied to Congress, under oath, and her staffers took the fifth amendment and got immunity deals.
It's worse than Watergate.
The investigation of Hillary Clinton was rigged, and it's a shame, and it's one of the saddest things that have ever taken place in our nation.
We have become a Banana Republic.
Yesterday, we learned that the FBI made a side deal with Clinton's top aides to DESTROY their laptops.
Hillary Clinton is the ringleader of a criminal enterprise that has corrupted our government at the highest levels, and the American people have one chance to stop it ... by sending in your ballots.
We are also going to fix our inner cities
45% of African-American children under the age of six live in poverty.
58% of African-American youth don't have jobs.
More than 3,000 have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year.
Homicides are up nearly 50% in Washington, D.C. and more than 60% in Baltimore.
The Democrats, like Hillary Clinton, have run the inner cities for 50 years, six years, seventy years or more.
They've produced only more joblessness, failing schools, and rising crime.
They've horribly failed and abused our African-American and Latino communities.
To those African-Americans and Latinos suffering in our country I say: What do you have to lose?
Vote For Donald Trump.
I will fix it.
To everyone in the country I say: what do you have to lose?
We will have safe communities for EVERYONE.
School choice for your children.
Great trade deals that bring jobs into our country, not out of our country.
Everyone will be included in the American Dream.
Here are the amazing things we are going to do for our country starting in 2017:
We are going to have the biggest job-creating tax cut since Ronald Reagan; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; end common core; repeal and replace job-killing Obamacare; make childcare affordable; save the 2nd amendment; support the men and women of law enforcement; rebuild our depleted military and take care of our vets; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
We are going to rebuild America.
We are going to revitalize America.
And we are going to unite America.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
You're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life.
You're going to remember this day.
We're going to make history.
This is a movement like you've never seen before.
We're going to make history together.
You're going to look back at this event, and you're going to look back at November 8th, or the day you put in your early ballot, and say this is by far the most important vote I've ever cast for anyone at any time.
You are going to be proud of your country again, and you are going to be proud of your President again.
A vote for me is a vote for change, and a vote for me is really a vote for you.
You are voting to believe in yourselves.
A vote for commonsense government, solutions to problems.
It's a vote for jobs, jobs, jobs.
It's a vote for a government of, by and for the people.
All together, we are going to ...
Make America wealthy again.
We are going to make America strong again.
We are going to make America safe again.
And we are going to make America great again.
In 34 days, we are going to win this state, we are going to win the White House.
How many of you watched the Vice Presidential Debate last night?
Mike did such an incredible job.
I would argue that Mike had the single most decisive victory in the history of Vice Presidential debates.
Last night America also got a firsthand look at my judgement and the judgement of my opponent.
Our first Presidential decision was the selection of our running mates, and all of America saw that I made the right choice.
While Mike laid out big and bold solutions for America, his opponent talked only of small and petty distractions.
Hillary Clinton has been there for 30 years, and hasn't fixed anything.
In fact, she's just made things worse ... she failed upstate New York, promising to create 200,000 jobs, but manufacturing is down almost 40 percent.
She failed overseas, producing only death and destruction ... she unleashed ISIS, destabilized Iraq, Syria and Libya, and put Iran on the path to nuclear weapons.
At home, Hillary Clinton failed Latinos and African-Americans, producing only more poverty in the inner cities.
She is merely the vessel for the global special interests bleeding this country dry.
I am running to represent Americans ... and we are going to make America Rich again.
I am going to end illegal immigration, stop the massive inflow of refugees, keep jobs from pouring out of our country, renegotiate our disastrous trade deals, and massively reduce taxes and regulations on our workers and our small businesses.
My economic agenda is very simple: jobs, jobs, jobs.
The problems we face as a country are immense, and it is going to take bold action to turn things around.
Right now, we owe $20 trillion in debt.
It doubled under President Obama.
Our infrastructure is like that of a third-world country.
The homicide rate last year experienced the biggest single-year increase in 45 years.
Our police are under-funded, under-staffed, and under-supported ... and Hillary Clinton basically accuses our police of all being racist.
Our border is wide open, and drugs and criminal cartels are pouring into the country.
Thousands of refugees are being admitted, with no way to screen them, and are instantly made eligible for welfare and free healthcare ... even as our own Veterans die waiting for the medical care they need.
Our annual trade deficit with the world is nearly $800 billion a year.
The federal budget is a disaster.
Our State Department, mostly under the watch of Hillary Clinton, misplaced or lost $6 billion in taxpayer funds.
We have the worst so-called recovery since the Great Depression.
We are a nation divided, with race riots in the streets.
Our college students graduate, loaded with debt, only to discover they can't find jobs ... or certainly not the jobs they want.
Our allies aren't paying their fair share, foreign countries like Russia and China do not respect us, and our taxpaying citizens send troops and foreign aid all over the world even as their own cities can't provide the most basic services.
America needs a turnaround.
America needs a comeback.
America needs a change.
That is why I am running.
On November 8th, we are going to show the whole world that America is back ... bigger, and better, and stronger than ever before.
First, we are going to repeal and replace Obamacare.
President Obama said if you like your doctor you can keep your doctor.
That was a lie.
He promised his plan would reduce premiums by $2,500 dollars.
Instead, they surged $5,000.
Another lie.
Now, of all people, President Bill Clinton has come out and told the truth about Obamacare.
Two days ago, Bill Clinton torched President Obama's signature legislation.
Remember, Hillary Clinton called Obamacare "one of the greatest accomplishments of President Obama, of the Democratic Party, and of our country."
Bill has a different view.
Here is what bill said:
He just said it's a "crazy system," and that "it's the craziest thing in the world."
Bill said:
"people out there [are] busting it, sometimes 60 hours a week, [and] wind up with their premiums doubled and their coverage cut in half...the people getting killed in this deal are the small business people and the individuals who make just a bit too much money to get any of these subsidies."
Clinton added that it "doesn't make any sense," and that "the insurance model doesn't work."
On my first day in office, I am going to ask a Republican Congress to send me a bill to immediately repeal and replace Obamacare.
There is only one way to stop Obamacare: to vote for Trump.
The deadline to register to vote by mail is October 8th.
The deadline to register to vote online or in-person is October 18th.
And early voting begins on the 22nd.
Fixing our trade deals will be the foundation of our economic revival
China, Japan, and Europe are printing huge sums of money ... the devaluation of currencies is staggering as to what it represents for our country, our businesses, and our citizens.
We're not on a level playing field, and our politicians don't understand what is going on.
Our jobs are being lost in massive numbers, and we are not making things in America anymore.
Too much is being made in other countries.
When I am President, we will start making things in America again.
Our nation has lost one-third of its manufacturing jobs since Bill Clinton's NAFTA ... a deal supported by Hillary Clinton.
Hillary's Korea deal also cost us another 100,000 jobs.
Since China entered the World Trade Organization ... another Bill and Hillary-backed deal ... 70,000 factories have shut down or left the United States.
That's 15 factories closing a day, on average.
We are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world.
As the factories leave, our money leaves with them.
Stores close, schools suffer, the tax base erodes, wages fall and the quality of life declines.
Real cash wages for many workers today are lower than they were in 1973.
We've rebuilt other countries at the expense of our own.
Skyscrapers go up in Beijing, while plants and factories crumble in the United States.
Companies like Carrier, General Electric, Motorola, Mattel, Fiat Chrysler, and so many others are moving their jobs to Mexico, and to other countries.
And now, Ford has announced it's moving all of its small car production to Mexico also.
We are going to renegotiate NAFTA and if we don't get the deal we want, we will withdraw from NAFTA and start over to get a much better deal for our workers.
We are also going to stand up to foreign currency manipulation, and apply tariffs to countries that cheat.
We will also stop the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the deal Hillary called the "Gold Standard."
The backers of the deal have donated heavily to Hillary Clinton, and their wish is her command.
She is an insider fighting only for herself and for her donors.
I am an outsider fighting for YOU.
We will stop the foreign cheating, the product dumping, and the one-sided trade deals.
We will lower taxes on American business, from 35% to 15%, and many small businesses will file as individuals any pay only 12 percent.
On top of that, we will have the largest regulatory reform in American history.
Our tax, trade, energy and regulatory reforms will help us reach 4% growth and create at least 25 million new jobs in a decade.
America will become the great jobs magnet of the world.
Factories will come rushing in, our schools and communities will be revitalized, and our poorest citizens will get new jobs and higher pay ...and new hope.
But to be a rich nation, we must also be a secure nation.
Security begins at the border.
Any government that does not protect its own people is a government unworthy and unfit to lead.
Countless Americans who have died in recent years would be alive today if not for the open border policies of this President Obama and Hillary Clinton.
This includes incredible Americans like 21-year-old Sarah Root.
The man who killed her arrived at the border, entered federal custody, and then was released into a U.S. community under the immigration policies of Obama-Clinton.
He was released again after the crime, and is now at large.
Sarah had graduated from college with a 4.0, top of her class, the day before.
Also among the victims of the Obama-Clinton open borders policies was Grant Ronnebeck, a 21 year-old convenience store clerk in Mesa, Arizona.
He was murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member previously convicted of burglary who had also been released from Federal Custody.
Another victim is Kate Steinle, gunned down in the Sanctuary City of San Francisco by an illegal immigrant deported five previous times.
Then there is the case of 90 year-old Earl Olander, who was brutally beaten and left to bleed to death in his home.
The perpetrators were illegal immigrants with criminal records who did not meet the Obama Administration's priorities for removal.
In California, a 64-years old Air Force Veteran, Marilyn Pharis, was sexually assaulted and beaten to death with a hammer.
Her killer had been arrested on multiple occasions, but was never deported.
Also in California, my good friend, Jamiel Shaw, lost his amazing son at the age of 17 ... he was viciously shot and killed by an illegal immigrant.
The killer had 3 gun charges, as well as battery of a police officer, prior to the shooting but he had not been deported from our country.
There are more than 2 million criminal aliens with criminal convictions in the country right now, and more who have escaped the law entirely ... when I am President, we are getting them out, and we are getting them out quickly.
All Americans living lawfully in this country, including millions of patriotic hardworking immigrants, are entitled to have their jobs, their wages, and their security protected.
The borders around our nation are for the benefit of all people living here today ... and when those borders are erased, it's often the lawful immigrants already here who are the first to suffer lost jobs and decreased security.
At the same time, our country is being infiltrated by terrorists.
Just two days ago, an immigrant from Bangladesh was charged in another ISIS plot.
Hundreds of immigrants from high-risk regions have been implicated in terrorism inside the United States since 9/11.
The terrorists who planted the bombs in New York and Jersey, and who carried out the mall stabbing in Minnesota, were foreign nationals admitted into our country ... as was the mall shooter in Washington State.
Now, the media doesn't want to talk about this ... they don't want to ask how our vetting procedures failed, or how immigration from high-risk parts of the world increased the chances of terrorism and violence.
The Boston Bombers were here on asylum.
The San Bernardino Shooter was here on a fianc.. visa from Saudi Arabia.
The Orlando shooter was the son of a Taliban supporter from Afghanistan.
I am going to keep the terrorists out of our country.
Hillary Clinton wants a 550% increase in Syrian Refugees.
Hillary is for open borders.
I am not running to be President of the world.
I am running to be President of the United States.
I am for America First.
For the first time in American history, we have the endorsement of our ICE officers and our Border Patrol officers.
We are going to build a border wall, enforce our laws, and keep our people safe.
I have a simple message for the cartels, the gang members, and the drug dealers preying on our citizens ... your days are numbered, and your reign of crime will soon come crashing to an end.
We are also going to end the government corruption
Hillary Clinton put her emails on an illegal secret server open to foreign hacking.
Then she bleached and destroyed 33,000 emails ... after a congressional subpoena.
She lied to Congress, under oath, and her staffers took the Fifth Amendment and got immunity deals.
Now we have learned that the FBI made a side deal with Clinton's top aides to DESTROY their laptops.
Hillary Clinton is the ringleader of a criminal enterprise and the only way to deliver justice is to mail in your ballots.
We are also going to fix our inner cities, and help Latino Americans
45% of African-American children under the age of 6 live in poverty.
58% of African-American youth don't have jobs.
More than 3,000 people have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year.
Homicides are up nearly 50% in Washington, D.C. and more than 60% in Baltimore.
The Democrats, like Hillary Clinton, have run the inner cities for 50 years, sixty years, seventy years or more.
They've produced only more joblessness, failing schools, and rising crime.
To those African-Americans suffering in our country I say: What do you have to lose?
Vote For Donald Trump.
I will fix it.
I am also going to fight to help millions of Latinos trapped in poverty, and to help their children grow up in safety and peace.
Poor communities will see a massive infusion of new small businesses, and new high-paying jobs.
I am also going to fight to provide school choice to every low-income African-American and Latino child in this nation.
I want to put every American child on the ladder of success: a great education, and a high-paying job.
Here are some more amazing things we are going to do for our country starting in 2017:
We are going to have the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; end common core; repeal and replace job-killing Obamacare; make childcare affordable; save the 2nd amendment; support the men and women of law enforcement; rebuild our depleted military and take care of our vets; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
This Election Day, you have one magnificent chance to deliver justice for every forgotten man, woman and child in this country.
On November 8th, the arrogance of Washington D.C. will come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter.
The failed and corrupt political establishment will be replaced with a new government of, by and for the people.
I am going to fight for every last citizen in this land, and I am going to fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
You're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life.
You're going to remember this day.
This is a movement like you've never seen before.
We're going to make history together.
You're going to look back at this election, and say this is by far the most important vote I've ever cast for anyone at any time.
A vote for me is a vote for change, and a vote for me is really a vote for you.
You are voting to believe in yourselves.
You are voting to believe in your country.
All together, we are going to ...
Make America wealthy again.
We are going to make America strong again.
We are going to make America safe again.
And we are going to make America great again.
With your help, in 34 days, we are going to win this state, we are going to win the White House, and we are going to bring back our jobs.
We are going to make America rich again.
I am going to end illegal immigration, stop the massive inflow of refugees, keep jobs from pouring out of our country, renegotiate our disastrous trade deals, and massively reduce taxes and regulations on our workers and our small businesses.
Hillary Clinton has been there for 30 years, and hasn't fixed anything.
In fact, she's just made things worse ... it's been 30 years of failure.
The problems we face as a country are immense, and it is going to take bold action to turn things around.
Right now, we owe $20 trillion in debt.
It doubled under President Obama.
Our infrastructure is like that of a third-world country.
The homicide rate last year experienced the biggest single-year increase in 45 years.
Heroin overdoses are surging, and meth overdoses in Nevada are up 22 percent.
Thousands of refugees are being admitted, with no way to screen them, and are instantly made eligible for welfare and free healthcare ... even as our own Veterans die waiting for the medical care they need.
Our annual trade deficit with the world is nearly $800 billion a year.
The federal budget is a disaster.
Our State Department, mostly under the watch of Hillary Clinton, misplaced or lost $6 billion in taxpayer funds.
We have the worst so-called recovery since the Great Depression.
On top of it all, our taxpaying citizens send troops and foreign aid all over the world even as their own cities can't provide the most basic services.
America needs a turnaround.
America needs a comeback.
America needs a change.
And that change is coming on November 8th.
We are going to show the whole world that America is back ... bigger, and better, and stronger than ever before.
First, we are going to repeal and replace Obamacare.
President Bill Clinton has come out and told the truth about Obamacare.
Two days ago, Bill Clinton torched President Obama's signature legislation.
Remember, Hillary Clinton called Obamacare "one of the greatest accomplishments of President Obama, of the Democratic Party, and of our country."
Bill has a different view.
Here is what bill said:
He just said it's a "crazy system," and that "it's the craziest thing in the world."
Bill said:
"people out there [are] busting it, sometimes 60 hours a week, [and] wind up with their premiums doubled and their coverage cut in half...the people getting killed in this deal are the small business people and the individuals who make just a bit too much money to get any of these subsidies."
Clinton added that it "doesn't make any sense," and that "the insurance model doesn't work."
There is only one way to stop Obamacare: to vote for Trump.
The deadline to register to vote by mail is October 8th.
The deadline to register to vote online or in-person is October 18th.
And early voting begins on the 22nd.
With your votes, you will also be voting to protect the 2ndamendment rights of every law-abiding gun-owner in Nevada.
Hillary wants to effectively abolish the 2ndamendment, by overturning D.C. vs. Heller and declaring that guns are not a private right.
We are also going to conserve your land and natural resources for hunters, anglers, and all who enjoy the outdoors.
Fixing our trade deals will be the foundation of our economic revival
My economic agenda can be summed up with three very simple words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
But to bring back our jobs, we must fix our trade deals ... and stand up to countries that cheat.
China, Japan, and Europe are printing huge sums of money ... the devaluation of currencies is staggering as to what it represents for our country, our businesses, and our citizens.
We're not on a level playing field, and our politicians don't understand what is going on.
Our jobs are being lost in massive numbers, and we are not making things in America anymore.
Too much is being made in other countries.
When I am President, we will start making things in America again.
Our nation has lost one-third of its manufacturing jobs since Bill Clinton's NAFTA ... a deal supported by Hillary Clinton.
Hillary's Korea deal also cost us another 100,000 jobs.
Since China entered the World Trade Organization ... another Bill and Hillary-backed deal ... 70,000 factories have shut down or left the United States.
That's 15 factories closing a day, on average.
The jobs are leaving Nevada, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Ohio, New Hampshire, Michigan, Illinois, Virginia, and all across this country.
I'm going to stop the jobs from leaving our country ... and I'm going to bring millions of new jobs back into our country.
It's going to be a new day in America.
For too long, we've rebuilt other countries at the expense of our own.
Skyscrapers go up in Beijing, while plants and factories crumble in the United States.
Companies like Carrier, General Electric, Motorola, Mattel, Fiat Chrysler, and so many others are moving their jobs to Mexico, and to other countries.
And now, Ford has announced it's moving all of its small car production to Mexico also.
We are going to renegotiate NAFTA and if we don't get the deal we want, we will withdraw from NAFTA and start over to get a much better deal for our workers.
We will also lower taxes on American business, from 35% to 15%, and we will have the largest regulatory reform in American history.
Thousands of new companies, millions of new jobs, and trillions of dollars in new wealth will come pouring into the United States.
But to be a rich nation, we must also be a secure nation.
Security begins at the border.
Hillary Clinton is unfit to be President because she supports open borders.
In fact, as Secretary of State, she allowed thousands of criminal aliens to be freed into our country because their own countries wouldn't take them back -- it was her job to cancel visas to countries that refused to take back their criminals.
But she didn't do it.
The ICE officers, who endorsed me ... their first endorsement of a candidate ever ... issued a lengthy statement on Hillary Clinton's immigration plans.
Let me read from it.
Again, this all a quote from the ICE officers: "Hillary Clinton has promised the most radical immigration proposal in U.S.
history."
"Her radical plan would result in the loss of thousands of innocent American lives, mass victimization and death for many attempting to immigrate to the United States, the total gutting of interior enforcement, the handcuffing of ICE officers, and an uncontrollable flood of illegal immigrants across U.S.
borders."
Their quote continues.
"She proposes to keep and expand executive amnesty, to expand catch- and-release, to expand President Obama's non-enforcement priorities to the point where there is virtually no real immigration enforcement or policing of visa overstays, to support Sanctuary Cities, to extend Obamacare to illegal immigrants, to grant amnesty within 100 days, to extend Social Security and Medicare to illegal immigrants through amnesty, plus a 550% increase in the admission of Syrian refugees."
The ICE officers conclude by saying: "Her plan is total amnesty plus open borders."
That whole quote is from the nation's Immigration and Customs Enforcement Officers.
In short, Hillary's immigration stance is disqualifying.
The first duty of the President of the United States is to protect the citizens of the United States ... anyone who fails to understand that is unworthy to lead this nation.
There are more than 2 million criminal aliens with convictions in the country right now, and many more criminal illegal immigrants who have committed severe offenses but escaped the law entirely ... when I am President, we are getting them out, and we are getting them out quickly.
At the same time, our country is being infiltrated by terrorists.
Hundreds of immigrants from high-risk regions have been implicated in terrorism inside the United States since 9/11.
The terrorists who planted the bombs in New York and New Jersey, and who carried out the mall stabbing in Minnesota, were foreign nationals admitted into our country ... as was the mall shooter in Washington State.
The Boston Bombers were here on asylum.
The San Bernardino Shooter was here on a fianc.. visa from Saudi Arabia.
The Orlando shooter was the son of a Taliban supporter from Afghanistan.
Yet, Hillary Clinton wants a 550% increase in Syrian Refugees.
I am not running to be President of the world.
I am running to be President of the United States.
I am for America First.
We are going to build a border wall, enforce our laws, and keep Radical Islamic Terrorists out of our country.
We are also going to end the government corruption
Hillary Clinton put her emails on an illegal secret server open to foreign hacking.
Then she bleached and destroyed 33,000 emails ... after a congressional subpoena.
She lied to Congress, under oath, and her staffers took the Fifth Amendment and got immunity deals.
It's worse than Watergate.
Hillary Clinton put her public office up for sale and, if she ever got the chance, she'd put the Oval Office up for sale too.
Now we have learned that the FBI made a side deal with Clinton's top aides to DESTROY their laptops.
Hillary Clinton is the ringleader of a criminal enterprise and the only way to deliver justice is to show up and vote.
We are also going to fix our inner cities, and help Latino Americans
45% of African-American children under the age of 6 live in poverty.
58% of African-American youth don't have jobs.
More than 3,000 people have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year.
The Democrats, like Hillary Clinton, have run the inner cities for 50 years, sixty years, seventy years or more.
They've produced only more joblessness, failing schools, and rising crime.
To those African-Americans suffering in our country I say: What do you have to lose?
Vote For Donald Trump.
I will fix it.
I will be your greatest champion, and I will deliver real change and justice in your communities.
I am also going to fight to help millions of Latinos trapped in poverty, and fight to provide school choice to every low-income African-American and Latino child in this nation.
Here are some more amazing things we are going to do for our country starting in 2017:
We are going to have the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; lift restrictions on all sources of American energy, and put the miners and steelworkers back to work; end Common Core; repeal and replace job-killing Obamacare; save the 2ndamendment; support the men and women of law enforcement; rebuild our depleted military and take care of our vets; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
This Election Day, you have one magnificent chance to deliver justice for every forgotten man, woman and child in this country.
On November 8th, the arrogance of Washington D.C. will come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter.
The failed and corrupt political establishment will be replaced with a new government of, by and for the people.
I am going to fight for every citizen, of every background, from every stretch of this nation ... and I am going to fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
You're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life.
You're going to remember this day.
This is a movement like you've never seen before.
We're going to make history together.
You're going to look back at this election, and say this is by far the most important vote I've ever cast for anyone at any time.
A vote for me is a vote for change, and a vote for me is really a vote for you.
You are voting to believe in yourselves.
You are voting to believe in your future.
You are voting to believe in your country.
All together, we are going to ...
Make America wealthy again.
We are going to make America strong again.
We are going to make America safe again.
And we are going to make America great again.
The election of Hillary Clinton would lead to the destruction of our country.
Today we learned the Department of Justice fed information to the Clinton campaign about the e-mail investigation, so that the campaign could be prepared to cover up her crimes.
This is collusion and corruption of the highest order, and is one more reason why I will ask my Attorney General to appoint a special prosecutor.
We have to investigate the investigation.
Hillary bleached and deleted 33,000 emails after a congressional subpoena ... and then destroyed her phones with a hammer ... all to cover-up her crimes.
People have gone to jail for doing far less.
She also lost as much as $6 billion taxpayer dollars.
These Wikileaks emails confirm what those of us here today have known all along: Hillary Clinton is the vessel for a corrupt global establishment that is raiding our country and surrendering our sovereignty.
This criminal government cartel doesn't recognize borders, but believes in global governance, unlimited immigration, and rule by corporations.
...
Even Chelsea Clinton, the WikiLeaks emails show, expressed "serious concerns" about conflicts of interests at the Clinton Foundation and State Department.
During a recent trip to Florida, I had a chance to spend some time with the incredible residents of Little Haiti.
The Haitian community has contributed so much to this country.
I also learned from them, firsthand, how much they despise the Clintons for what they did to the people of Haiti.
New emails revealed today by ABC News show that during the deadly earthquake in Haiti, which killed over 150,000 people, the Clintons couldn't stop cashing in.
As people were dying in Haiti, Clinton insiders were separating out requests from "Friends of Bill" or "William Jefferson Clinton VIPs" so that their business interests or contracts would receive special treatment.
People who were labeled "Not Friends of Bill" were placed on the sidelines.
In their biggest project, the Clintons used $400 million in aid and U.S. taxpayer funds to build what amounted to a sweatshop.
And guess who set it up?
Cheryl Mills, Hillary's Chief of Staff who helped destroy her emails, and then got an immunity deal from the FBI that included the destruction of her computer.
The company that benefitted from Mills' actions then invested in a company owned by Cheryl Mills.
Today, as Haiti's death toll from Hurricane Matthew is on the rise, we should never forget how Bill and Hillary Clinton handled Haiti last time.
To all of our friends in Haiti, your day of justice is coming, and it arrives on November 8th.
Not only have the Clintons ripped off Haiti, but the new emails show members of the Clinton team attacking Catholics.
This is deeply offensive.
It's just the latest evidence of the hatred that the Clinton Campaign has for everyday Americans.
We've all read the reports and heard the stories about how disrespectfully she treats law enforcement, secret service, and others in uniform.
She even smeared all of America's police officers as essentially racist.
I'm proud of the fact that I have always treated the working people of this country with dignity and respect, especially our military and law enforcement personnel.
The WikiLeaks emails show that Hillary's staff even has to give her secret notes on when she needs to smile.
The emails also show, yet again, that the DNC rigged the Democratic election to give it to Hillary Clinton.
The DNC Vice Chair was caught feeding information about Bernie Sanders' plans to the Clinton Campaign.
To all the Bernie voters out there: don't vote for a Wall Street sellout like Hillary Clinton.
A vote for Hillary is a vote for more reckless foreign invasions, more Wall Street cheating, more terrible trade deals, and ... as confirmed by Wikileaks ... she also wants to cut Medicare and Social Security.
...
Wikileaks also shows something I have been warning about for a very long time.
The media is simply an extension of the Clinton Campaign.
It's just one more way the system is rigged.
Reporters who work for these outlets ... like the Washington Post, or the New York Times ... may think of themselves as journalists, but they are actually just cogs in a corporate political machine.
The emails show the New York Times, Boston Globe, Univision and Jon Harwood of CNBC all doing favors for the Clintons, and smother the Clintons with praise.
The NYT even gave Clinton veto power of her quotes in their stories.
It's called corruption.
The emails also show that the Hillary was given the CNN townhall questions before her big debate against Bernie Sanders.
Dona Brazile, the DNC Vice Chair, emailed: "from time to time I get the questions in advance."
The media can't report on the establishment because the media is the establishment.
And they're all teamed up against you, the American people.
...
On November 8th, the arrogance of Washington D.C. will come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter.
We are going to replace our corrupt global establishment that has failed us on borders, on trade, on foreign policy, on the economy, and so much more.
We are going to replace the failed leadership in Washington who have betrayed you, squandered our wealth, and sold our country.
I am asking all Americans ... Republicans, Independents and Democrats ... to join us in our campaign to give our government back to the American people.
I am going to fight for every citizen, of every background, from every stretch of this nation ... and I am going to fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
You're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life.
You're going to remember this day.
This is a movement like you've never seen before.
We're going to make history together.
You're going to look back at this election, and say this is by far the most important vote I've ever cast for anyone at any time.
A vote for me is a vote for change, and a vote for me is really a vote for you.
Once again, we are going to have a government of, by and for the people.
We will make America wealthy again.
We will make America strong again.
We will make America safe again.
And we are going to make America great again.
In 24 days, we are going to win this state and we are going to win the White House.
We are going to deliver real change that puts America First.
We are going to renegotiate our terrible trade deals, reduce surging crime, cut taxes and regulations, lift the restrictions on American energy, end common core, reduce the cost of college, make childcare more affordable, and repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare.
Your jobs will come back under a Trump Administration.
Your incomes will go up under a Trump Administration.
Your taxes will go way down under a Trump Administration.
Your companies won't be leaving our country under a Trump Administration.
We are going to be a rich country again.
We are also going to end government corruption.
Hillary Clinton is the most corrupt person ever to seek the office of the Presidency ... and the media, donors and special interests who support her will do everything they can to cling to their power and prestige at your expense.
The Hillary Clinton documents released by WikiLeaks make more clear than ever just how much is at stake in this election.
The documents show the Clinton Campaign colluding with the State Department and Justice Department over the investigation into Hillary's illegal email server that put your family and your country in danger.
They show how the Clintons ripped off the people of Haiti.
They show the Clinton Campaign viciously attacking Catholics and Evangelicals.
They also show how the media collaborates and conspires directly with the Clinton Campaign.
To cover-up her crimes, Hillary Clinton deleted 33,000 emails ... after a Congressional Subpoena ... she lied to Congress under oath, she made 13 phones disappear, some with a hammer, and now we learn 2 boxes of evidence mysteriously went missing.
Hillary Clinton should have been prosecuted, and gone to jail for her crimes.
The FBI and the Department of Justice created a fraud in allowing Hillary Clinton to get away with her terrible crimes ... and I guarantee you, the Clintons are laughing at them.
The Director's performance in Congress, coupled with Bill Clinton's clandestine meeting on the tarmac in the Attorney General's airplane just prior to decision-time on Hillary ... supposedly talking about golf and grandchildren ... is perhaps the lowest point in those department's history.
Instead of being held accountable, Hillary is running for President in what looks like a rigged election.
The election is being rigged by corrupt media, pushing completely false allegations and outright lies, in an effort to elect her President.
But we are going to stop it.
We are not going to back down.
We are not going to let it happen.
We are just getting started.
Americans have had it with the years, the decades, of Clinton Corruption.
They get rich stealing your jobs and shipping them to other countries.
This will finally be the year the American people say: Enough is Enough.
Speaking in secret to a foreign bank Hillary Clinton said her dream is for totally "open trade and open borders."
By "open trade," she means foreign countries can cheat us out of millions of jobs and trillions of dollars.
By "open borders," she means totally unlimited immigration.
When she thought no one was listening, Hillary Clinton was plotting to destroy the sovereignty of the United States.
Either we win the election, or we lose the country.
A Trump Administration will secure and defend our borders.
And yes, we will build a wall.
A wall will not only keep out dangerous cartels and criminals, but it will also keep out the drugs and heroin poisoning our youth.
When I won the New Hampshire primary, I promised the people of New Hampshire that I would stop drugs from pouring into your communities.
I am now doubling-down on that promise, and can guarantee you ... we will not only stop the drugs from pouring in, but we will help all of those people so seriously addicted get the assistance they need to unchain themselves.
New Hampshire has one of the highest drug overdose death rates in the country.
We have to solve this crisis.
I have to give credit to my running mate, Mike Pence, on this issue.
Mike increased the mandatory minimum sentences for the most serious drug offenders, while expanding access to treatment and prevention options for those struggling with addiction.
We must make similar efforts a priority for the nation.
Not too long ago we read about Christopher Honor and Courtney Griffin -- a young Rockingham County couple who died of an overdose within a year of each other.
Their story of prescription drugs, heroin, wait times for treatment, and missed opportunity in the court system are a tragic reminder of why we need a plan to end the opioid epidemic.
First, we will stop the flow of illegal drugs into the country.
The number of heroin seizures on the border has tripled since 2008.
I've received the first-ever endorsement of our Border Patrol and ICE officers, and under a Trump Administration, we will work with them to end the flow of drugs across our border for good.
We are also going to put an end to Sanctuary Cities, which refuse to turn over illegal immigrant drug traffickers for deportation.
We will dismantle the illegal immigrant cartels and violent gangs, and we will send them swiftly out of our country.
We will aggressively prosecute traffickers of illegal drugs, and provide law enforcement and prosecutors with the resources and support they need to do their jobs.
President Obama has commuted the sentences of record numbers of high level drug traffickers, many of them kingpins, and violent armed traffickers with extensive criminal histories.
Hillary Clinton promises to continue and expand this approach, turning our streets back over to gangs, drug cartels, and armed career criminals.
Over the last few years this administration has been steadily dismantling the federal criminal justice system.
Tens of thousands of drug dealers have been released from prison early, including many illegal immigrants--regardless of their history of violence, or ties to transnational gangs and cartels.
Second, we will close the shipping loopholes that China and others are exploiting to send dangerous drugs across our borders in the hands of our own postal service.
These traffickers use loopholes in the Postal Service to mail fentanyl and other drugs to users and dealers in the U.S.
A Trump administration will crack down on this abuse, and give law enforcement the tools they need to accomplish this mission.
Third, we will fix the misguided rules and regulations that have made this problem worse.
It is tragedy enough that so many Americans are struggling with life-threatening addiction.
We should not compound that tragedy with government policies and bureaucratic rules that make it even harder for them to get help.
The FDA has been far too slow to approve abuse-deterring drugs.
And when the FDA has approved these medications, the rules have been far too restrictive, severely limiting the number of authorized prescribers as well as the number of patients each doctor can treat.
Recovery medications have the potential to save thousands and thousands of lives.
We prescribe opioids like Oxycontin freely, but when patients become addicted to those drugs, we stop doctors from giving patients the treatments they medically need.
As president, I'd work to lift the cap on the number of patients that doctors can treat, provided they follow safe prescribing practices and proper treatment supervision.
At the same time, DEA should reduce the amount of Schedule II opioids (drugs like oxycodone, methadone and fentanyl) that can be made and sold in the U.S. We have 5 percent of the world's population, but use 80 percent of the prescription opioids.
Finally, we will give people struggling with addiction access to the help they need.
Congress has already taken the first step by passing the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act.
This legislation is an important step.
I would also expand incentives for states and local governments to use drug courts and mandated treatment.
These can be a cost effective, appropriate, and humane response to addiction.
I would dramatically expand access to treatment slots and end Medicaid policies that obstruct inpatient treatment.
I would dramatically expand first responders' and caregivers' access to Narcan, an antidote that treats overdoses and saves thousands of lives.
I would also restore accountability to our Veterans Administration.
Too many of our brave veterans have been prescribed these dangerous and addictive drugs by a VA that should have been paying them better attention.
Together, these steps will ensure that every American struggling with addiction has access to the care and the help that he or she needs.
But, if we are going to bring hope back to our communities, we not only have to solve our drug crisis but our economic crisis.
The wealth has been raided from our country, leaving behind dilapidated communities, rusted out factories, and shattered dreams.
At the center of our economic revival will be fixing our terrible trade deals.
47 million Americans are in poverty and 45 million Americans are on Food Stamps.
We have nearly an $800 billion annual trade deficit in goods with the world, and the worst so-called recovery since the Great Depression.
This is the legacy of Obama-Clinton.
The state of New Hampshire has lost nearly 1 in 3 manufacturing jobs since NAFTA, signed by Bill Clinton and supported by Hillary Clinton.
Since China entered the World Trade Organization ... another Bill and Hillary-backed deal ... 70,000 factories have shut down or left the United States.
That's 15 factories closing a day, on average.
We are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world.
Companies like Carrier, General Electric, Motorola, Mattel, Fiat
Chrysler, and so many others are moving their jobs to Mexico.
Right here in New Hampshire, I visited the Osram Sylvania plant that closed its doors in 2014 and shipped its jobs to China and Mexico.
If I win, day one, we are going to announce our plans to renegotiate NAFTA.
If we don't get the deal we want, we'll leave NAFTA and start over to get a much better deal.
We are going to start making things in America again.
As part of our plan to bring back our jobs, we are going to lower our business tax from 35 percent to 15 percent.
We will have a 10% tax on money parked overseas, bringing trillions in wealth back into our country.
Manufacturers will be able to expense the cost of new investment and equipment, to help make our country more competitive.
We will lower taxes massively on all Americans ... Hillary will raise your taxes massively.
We will become the great jobs magnet of the world.
Wages will rise, jobs will return, and factories will come rushing onto our shores.
Here are some of the amazing things we are going to do for our country starting in 2017:
We are going to have the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; defend religious liberty; reduce the cost of tuition; rebuild our depleted military and take care of our vets; repeal and replace Obamacare; save the 2nd amendment; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
You have 24 days to make every dream you ever dreamed of for your country come true.
On November 8th, the arrogance of Washington D.C. will come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter.
I am going to fight for every citizen, of every background, from every stretch of this nation ... and I am going to fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
You're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life.
You're going to remember this day.
This is a movement like you've never seen before.
We're going to make history together.
You're going to look back at this election, and say this is by far the most important vote I've ever cast for anyone at any time.
Once again, we are going to have a government of, by and for the people.
We will make America wealthy again.
We will make America strong again.
We will make America safe again.
And we are going to make America great again.
I am so happy to be back here in Columbus.
Make sure you request your absentee ballot to vote by mail.
And remind your friends and family to do the same.
We are now 26 days away from the most important election of our lifetimes.
And we've only begun to fight.
If we win, we will create a booming and thriving economy for young Americans.
We will create safe communities, lower taxes, leaner government, affordable childcare and healthcare, and a government that is honest and decent and fair.
We are the campaign of change.
We will deliver jobs, opportunity and justice for future generations.
I've wanted this race to be about the issues.
But the Clinton Campaign has refused to discuss the issues.
They only place they want to go is the gutter.
So they have slandered and libeled me with false accusations ... but we will not let these lies distract us from our campaign.
In an earlier speech today, I addressed the fact that I was falsely accused.
It is disgraceful that you can have front page articles in the New York Times inventing false claims, without any evidence, any witnesses, anything at all.
I want to talk about the policies affecting our lives, and your future.
Right now, our government has been taken hostage by global special interests that will stop at nothing to drain every last ounce of wealth from this country for their personal benefit.
The greatest weapon wielded by the Clinton Machine is the media.
The WikiLeaks emails show that the Clinton Machine and the Corporate Media are one in the same ... they collaborate and conspire together.
This Washington establishment will stop at nothing to stop all of us.
These are the people who have given us decades of endless wars producing only death and bloodshed, but no victory.
These are the same people who have flung our doors open to Radical Islam, putting us on the same path to France of multigenerational struggles with violence and extremism embedded in our communities.
These are the people who've allowed violent international cartels to invade our country and prey on our most vulnerable citizens.
Victims like Marilyn Pharis, raped by an illegal immigrant with a lengthy criminal record and beaten to death with a hammer.
These are the people who've let drugs pour into our country and poising our children.
These are the people who emptied the jobs out of Ohio, Pennsylvania, Michigan and North Carolina and shipped them to other countries.
The political powers trying to stop us are the people who've stripped the jobs form our inner cities, trapped millions of African-Americans and Hispanic-Americans in impoverished, crime-besieged neighborhoods, and left 70 million American women and child in poverty or near the brink of poverty.
At the center of this assault on American prosperity is the Clinton Machine.
They don't work for you, they don't work for America, the work only for themselves and their donors ... including foreign government and foreign actors.
Hillary Clinton is a criminal who destroyed 33,000 emails after a Congressional Subpoena.
She ignored hundreds of requests for security in Benghazi, causing the deaths of four brave Americans ... and then she lied to the faces of the grieving parents about the reason for the attack.
She defended a man who violently and viciously raped a 12 year-old girl by horribly smearing and blaming the victim ... and the she laughed about getting the rapist off the hook.
Speaking in secret to a foreign bank, Hillary pledged her support for "open borders."
That means tens of millions of new foreign workers to compete against you for your jobs, your wages, your futures ... she's selling out the future of young American, of all backgrounds, to enrich her donors.
We won't let it happen.
Hillary and her special interest allies want to keep children in our inner cities trapped in failing schools.
Under a Trump Administration, disadvantaged children will be able to attend the public, private, charter or magnet school of their choice.
Under President Obama and Hillary Clinton, the national debt has almost doubled.
$20 trillion-dollar national debt is a weight around the future of every young person in this country.
It would require $120,000 from every millennial in the country to pay off.
The new debt added under Obama and Clinton would have been enough to pay off all the outstanding student loans in the United States 6 times over.
Yet, not one penny of that new debt has gone to lowering your tuition.
The share of 16-to-28-year-olds not in the labor force has increased to 45 percent during the Obama administration.
In a Trump Administration, we will work every day to make America great again for millennials.
First, we will Lower the Cost of College and Solve the Student Loan Crisis.
Tuition at public four-year institutions was 40% higher in the last school year than it was ten years ago.
In all, Americans owe $1.3 trillion on their student loans--more than auto loans, credit card debt, or home equity loans nationwide.
Students should not be asked to pay more on their loans than they can afford, and the debt should not be an albatross around their necks for the rest of their lives.
That is why under my student loan program, we would cap repayment to an affordable portion of a borrower's income--12.5%.
And if borrowers work hard and make their full payments for 15 years, we will let them get on with their lives.
That's the nature of the deal we give many public employees today.
Every American deserves the same deal, so we will equalize treatment so everyone can start saving for their families and retirement by the time they are 15 years out of college.
In addition, I will take steps to push colleges to cut the skyrocketing cost of tuition.
If the federal government is going to subsidize student loans, it has a right to expect that colleges work hard to control costs and invest their resources in their students.
If colleges refuse to take this responsibility seriously, they will be held accountable--including by reconsidering whether those with huge endowments deserve to keep those endowments tax-exempt.
Some schools are paying more to hedge funds and private equity managers than they are spending on tuition assistance--while taxpayers are guaranteeing hundreds of billions of dollars of student loans to pay for rising tuition.
We want universities to spend their endowments on their students, not themselves.
They need to use that money to cut the college debt and college tuition.
Much of the skyrocketing cost of college education is due to the tremendous bloat in college administrators and bureaucrats.
According to the Department of Education, the number of college administrators is up more than 60 percent since 1993--ten times the increase in tenured faculty positions.
Federal regulations are responsible for much of this administrative bloat.
Vanderbilt University estimated that it spends $150 million per year---11 percent of the university's budget--to comply with government regulations.
As president, I will immediately take steps to drive down college costs by reducing the unnecessary costs of compliance with federal regulations so that colleges can pass on the savings to students in the form of lower tuition.
I will also make it a priority to protect students' rights to free speech on campus.
In the past few decades, political correctness has transformed our institutions of higher education from ones that fostered spirited debate, to a place of extreme censorship where students are silenced.
We will end the political correctness, and foster free and respectful dialogue.
We also have to recognize that traditional four-year degree programs are not the only path to a good job and a good career.
We should support schools that allow people to learn skills and practice a trade so young people can have access to the education that's right for them.
And we must hold all schools equally accountable for their performance.
I will make sure that students have the information they need about all of their options before starting school, and for repaying their student loans upon leaving school.
There is a lot of room for improvement in this regard.
Currently, students navigate 16 complex repayment plans, 8 forgiveness programs, and 32 deferment and forbearance options...each of these programs has their own nuances and qualifications.
I will simplify this confusing maze into a single Income-Based Repayment Program, similar to those that have proved so popular in recent years.
We also have to make sure that those who have graduated college and those who are soon to graduate can find a good job to start a good career when they do.
Many mothers across this country are worried their kids won't find jobs, and they are right to be worried.
One of the biggest threats is outsourcing ... jobs for college-educated kids are being sent to other countries.
At the same time, companies are importing low-wage workers on H-1B visas to take jobs from young college-trained Americans.
We will protect these jobs for Americans.
My economic plan ... including tax, trade regulatory, and energy reforms ... will create 25 million new jobs and allow the private sector to grow at 4 percent per year.
This includes reforms to protect and expand the sharing economy--startups like Uber--that have managed to provide great services to consumers, and create lots of jobs in the process.
Finally, and most importantly, the foundation for a new prosperity will be a rededication to the constitutional rule of law.
A vote for me is a vote for change, and a vote for me is really a vote for you.
Together, we are going to make America great again.
In 24 days, we are going to win the state of Maine and we are going to win the White House.
Make sure to get your absentee ballots.
Together, we are going to deliver real change that puts America First.
My economic agenda can be summed up in three very beautiful words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
We are going to renegotiate our terrible trade deals, end illegal immigration, stop the massive inflow of refugees, reduce surging crime, cut taxes and regulations, lift the restrictions on American energy, end common core, and repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare.
We are also going to replace a failed political class that has betrayed our workers, spent trillions on endless foreign wars without victory, and destroyed our middle class.
Your jobs will come back under a Trump Administration.
Your incomes will go up under a Trump Administration.
Your taxes will go way down under a Trump Administration.
Your energy bills will go way down under a Trump Administration.
Your companies won't be leaving Maine under a Trump Administration.
We are going to be a rich country again.
We are also going to end government corruption.
Hillary speaks in secret to Goldman Sachs ... her private position ... then lies to you, the public, with her public position.
It's all a fraud.
Hillary Clinton deleted 33,000 emails ... after a Congressional Subpoena ... she lied to Congress under oath, she made 13 phones disappear, some with a hammer, and now we learn 2 boxes of email evidence mysteriously went missing.
Hillary Clinton should have been prosecuted, and gone to jail for her crimes.
The FBI and the Department of Justice created a fraud in allowing Hillary Clinton to get away with her terrible crimes ... and I guarantee you, the Clintons are laughing at them.
The Director's performance in Congress, coupled with Bill Clinton's clandestine meeting on the tarmac in the Attorney General's airplane just prior to decision-time on Hillary ... supposedly talking about golf and grandchildren ... is perhaps the lowest point in those department's history.
Instead of being held accountable, Hillary is running for President in what looks like a rigged election.
The election is being rigged by corrupt media, pushing false allegations and outright lies, in an effort to elect her President.
But we are going to stop it.
We are not going to back down.
We are not going to let it happen.
We have only just begun to fight.
Americans have had it with the years, the decades, of Clinton Corruption.
This will finally be the year the American people say: Enough is Enough.
Speaking in secret to a foreign bank Hillary Clinton said her dream is for totally "open trade and open borders."
Hillary and Bill raise millions of dollars from global interest groups who have no allegiance to this country or its workers.
By "open trade," she means foreign countries can cheat us out of millions of jobs and trillions of dollars.
By "open borders," she means totally unlimited immigration.
Either we win the election, or we lose the country.
Hillary's plan includes an open border with the Middle East ... meaning generations of radicalism within our shores.
She wants us to follow the path of France and Germany and import terrorism directly into the United States.
So let me state this as clearly as I can.
If I'm elected President I am going to keep Radical Islamic Terrorists out of our country.
We will also stop the crisis of illegal immigration.
A Trump Administration will secure and defend our borders.
And yes, we will build a wall.
We have the first-ever endorsement from our ICE and Border Patrol officers.
It was just reported that a man deported from our country 10 times in six years has been charged with raping a 12-year old girl.
In August, Texas Police arrested a serial illegal immigrant rapist who had been deported five times, including one 68 year-old woman with a cane who took his offer to drive her home.
He left her on the side of a dirt road.
What kind of government allows its own people to suffer such horrors?
As Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton allowed thousands of criminal aliens to be released because their home countries wouldn't take them back.
Among those she allowed to go free was a criminal alien who had previously been convicted for shooting a girl in the head ... after his release, he viciously murdered a young girl name Casey Chadwick.
A wall will not only keep out criminals, but it will also keep out the drugs and heroin poisoning our youth.
Drugs overdoses in Maine are on a record pace.
I have outlined a plan to stop the opioid crisis.
My plan begins with a strong border, includes the prosecution of drug dealers, and dramatically expands access to life-saving treatments that will help people unchain themselves from this terrible addiction.
But, if we are going to bring hope back to suffering Americans, we must also solve our jobs crisis.
At the center of our economic revival will be fixing our terrible trade deals.
47 million Americans are in poverty and 45 million Americans are on Food Stamps.
We have nearly an $800 billion annual trade deficit in goods with the world, and the worst so-called recovery since the Great Depression.
This is the legacy of Obama-Clinton.
When I am President, everything will change.
We will move people from the welfare rolls to the employment rolls.
We will end our chronic trade deficits.
We will start growing again.
We'll rebuild our roads, schools, bridges, tunnels, railways, hospitals and airports.
The state of Maine has lost nearly 1 in 3 manufacturing jobs since NAFTA, signed by Bill Clinton and supported by Hillary Clinton.
Since China entered the World Trade Organization ... another Bill and Hillary-backed deal ... 70,000 factories have shut down or left the United States.
That's 15 factories closing a day, on average.
We are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world.
If I win, day one, we are going to announce our plans to renegotiate NAFTA.
If we don't get the deal we want, we'll leave NAFTA and start over to get a much better deal.
We are going to start making things in America again.
As part of our plan to bring back our jobs, we are going to lower our business tax from 35 percent to 15 percent.
We will lower taxes massively on all Americans ... Hillary will raise your taxes massively.
Our biggest reductions will be for the working and middle class ... this includes letting parents deduct the cost of childcare.
Reagan's tax cuts in the eighties, and Kennedy's tax cuts in the sixties, brought us tremendous growth.
My economic reforms ... on taxes, trade, regulation and American energy ... will produce at least 25 million newjobs in a decade.
It's the most pro-growth economic plan in American history.
We are also going to protect the right of the people of Maine to use their own land.
President Obama, with the support of politicians like Hillary Clinton, issued an executive order 2 months ago making over 87,000 acres in Maine into a new "National Monument."
No consideration was made for local concerns, impacts to jobs, or the Maine forestry sector.
No approval by Congress.
Your state legislature opposed it.
It is just another federal overreach that is going to do more harm than good.
Obama and Clinton don't care that this area badly needs jobs and growth and that this decision -- done at the stroke of the pen without the support of the local community-- undermines the people that live and work here in Maine.
But we are going to turn it all around.
America's comeback begins on November 8th.
Here are some of the amazing things we are going to do for our country starting in 2017:
We are going to have the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; defend religious liberty; reduce the cost of tuition; provide school choice to every low-income child in America; rebuild our depleted military and take care of our vets; support the men and women of law enforcement; repeal and replace Obamacare; save the 2nd amendment; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
You have 24 days to make every dream you ever dreamed of for your country come true.
On November 8th, the arrogance of Washington D.C. will come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter.
I am going to fight for every citizen, of every background, from every stretch of this nation.
I'm going to fight for every child living in poverty.
I'm going to fight for every mom whose lost her child to illegal immigration, and drugs and gang violence.
I'm going to fight for every worker who deserves a raise, and for every community whose jobs and dreams have been ripped out and shipped to other countries.
I'm going to fight for every person in this country who believes government should serve the people ... not the donors.
I'm going to fight for every patriotic citizen that Hillary Clinton slanders as deplorable and irredeemable ... and I am going to be a President for all of our citizens.
I am going to fight to bring us together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
You're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life.
You're going to remember this day.
This is a movement like you've never seen before.
We're going to make history together.
You're going to look back at this election, and say this is by far the most important vote you've ever cast for anyone at any time.
Once again, we are going to have a government of, by and for the people.
We will make America wealthy again.
We will make America powerful again.
We will make America strong again.
We will make America safe again.
And we will make America great again.
We are one nation.
When one state hurts, we all hurt ... and we must all work together to lift each other up.
Working, building, restoring together.
Our prayers are with the families who have lost loved ones, and we send them our deepest condolences.
Though words cannot express the sadness one feels at times like this, I hope everyone in Louisiana knows that our country is praying for them and standing with them to help them in these difficult hours.
We are one country, one people, and we will have together one great future.
Tonight, I'd like to talk about the New American Future we are going to create together.
Last week, I laid out my plan to bring jobs back to our country.
On Monday, I laid out my plan to defeat Radical Islamic Terrorism.
On Tuesday, in Wisconsin, I talked about how we are going to restore law and order to this country.
Let me take this opportunity to extend our thanks and our gratitude to the police and law enforcement officers in this country who have sacrificed so greatly in these difficult times.
The chaos and violence on our streets, and the assaults on law enforcement, are an attack against all peaceful citizens.
If I am elected President, this chaos and violence will end ... and it will end very quickly.
Every single citizen in our land has a right to live in safety.
To be one united nation, we must protect all of our people.
But we must also provide opportunities for all of our people.
We cannot make America great again if we leave any community behind.
Nearly Four in ten African-American children are living in poverty.I will not rest until children of every color in this country are fully included in the American Dream.
Jobs, safety, opportunity.
Fair and equal representation.
This is what I promise to African-Americans, Hispanic-Americans, and all Americans.
But to achieve this New American Future we must break from the failures of the past.
As you know, I am not a politician.
I have worked in business, creating jobs and rebuilding neighborhoods my entire adult life.
I've never wanted to learn the language of the insiders, and I've never been politically correct ... it takes far too much time, and can often make more difficult.
Sometimes, in the heat of debate and speaking on a multitude of issues, you don't choose the right words or you say the wrong thing.
I have done that, and I regret it, particularly where it may have caused personal pain.
Too much is at stake for us to be consumed with these issues.
But one thing I can promise you is this: I will always tell you the truth.
I speak the truth for all of you, and for everyone in this country who doesn't have a voice.
I speak the truth on behalf of the factory worker who lost his or her job.
I speak the truth on behalf of the Veteran who has been denied the medical care they need ... and so many are not making it.
They are dying.
I speak the truth on behalf of the family living near the border that deserves to be safe in their own country but is instead living with no security at all.
Our campaign is about representing the great majority of Americans ... Republicans, Democrats, Independents, Conservatives and Liberals ... who read the newspaper, or turn on the TV, and don't hear anyone speaking for them.
All they hear are insiders fighting for insiders.
These are the forgotten men and women in our society, and they are angry at so much on so many levels.
The poverty, the unemployment, the failing schools, the jobs moving to other countries.
I am fighting for these forgotten Americans.
Fourteen months ago, I declared my campaign for the Presidency on the promise to give our government back to the people.
Every day since then, I've worked to repay the loyalty and the faith that you have put in me.
Every day I think about how much is at stake for this country.
This isn't just the fight of my life, it's the fight ofour lives ... together ... to save our country.
I refuse to let another generation of American children be excluded from the American Dream.
Our whole country loses when young people of limitless potential are denied the opportunity to contribute their talents because we failed to provide them the opportunities they deserved.
Let our children be dreamers too.
Our whole country loses every time a kid doesn't graduate from high school, or fails to enter the workforce or, worse still, is lost to the dreadful world of drugs and crime.
When I look at the failing schools, the terrible trade deals, and the infrastructure crumbling in our inner cities, I know all of this can be fixed - and it can be fixed very quickly.
In the world I come from, if something is broken, you fix it.
If something isn't working, you replace it.
If a product doesn't deliver, you make a change.
I have no patience for injustice, no tolerance for government incompetence, no sympathy for leaders who fail their citizens.
That's why I am running: to end the decades of bitter failure and to offer the American people a new future of honesty, justice and opportunity.
A future where America, and its people, always ... and I mean always ... come first.
Aren't you tired of a system that gets rich at your expense?
Aren't you tired of the same old lies and the same old broken promises?
And Hillary Clinton has proven to be one of the greatest liars of all time.
Aren't you tired of arrogant leaders who look down on you, instead of serving and protecting you?
That is all about to change ... and it's about to change soon.
We are going to put the American people first again.
I've travelled all across this country laying out my bold and modern agenda for change.
In this journey, I will never lie to you.
I will never tell you something I do not believe.
I will never put anyone's interests ahead of yours.
And, I will never, ever stop fighting for you.
I have no special interest.
I am spending millions of dollars on my own campaign ... nobody else is.
My only interest is the American people.
So while sometimes I can be too honest, Hillary Clinton is the exact opposite: she never tells the truth.
One lie after another, and getting worse each passing day.
The American people are still waiting for Hillary Clinton to apologize for all of the many lies she's told to them, and the many times she's betrayed them.
Tell me, has Hillary Clinton ever apologized for lying about her illegal email server and deleting 33,000 emails?
Has Hillary Clinton apologized for turning the State Department into a pay-for-play operation where favors are sold to the highest bidder?
Has she apologized for lying to the families who lost loved ones at Benghazi?
Has she apologized for putting Iran on the path to nuclear weapons?
Has she apologized for Iraq?
For Libya?
For Syria?
Has she apologized for unleashing ISIS across the world?
Has Hillary Clinton apologized for the decisions she made that have led to so much death, destruction and terrorism?
Speaking of lies, we now know from the State Department announcement that President Obama lied about the $400 million dollars in cash that was flown to Iran.
He denied it was for the hostages, but it was.
He said we don't pay ransom, but he did.
He lied about the hostages ... openly and blatantly ... just like he lied about Obamacare.
Now the Administration has put every American travelling overseas, including our military personnel, at greater risk of being kidnapped.
Hillary Clinton owns President Obama's Iran policy, one more reason she can never be allowed to be President.
Let's talk about the economy.
Here, in this beautiful state, so many people have suffered because of NAFTA.
Bill Clinton signed the deal, and Hillary Clinton supported it.
North Carolina has lost nearly half of its manufacturing jobs since NAFTA went into effect.
Bill Clinton also put China into the World Trade Organization ... another Hillary Clinton-backed deal.
Your city of Charlotte has lost 1 in 4 manufacturing jobs since China joined the WTO, and many of these jobs were lost while Hillary Clinton was Secretary of State ... our chief diplomat with China.
She was a disaster, totally unfit for the job.
Hillary Clinton owes the State of North Carolina a very big apology, and I think you'll get that apology around the same time you'll get to see her 33,000 deleted emails.
Another major issue in this campaign has been the border.
Our open border has allowed drugs and crime and gangs to pour into our communities.
So much needless suffering, so much preventable death.
I've spent time with the families of wonderful Americans whose loved ones were killed by the open borders and Sanctuary Cities that Hillary Clinton supports.
I've embraced the crying parents who've lost their children to violence spilling across our border.
Parents like Laura Wilkerson and Michelle Root and Sabine Durden and Jamiel Shaw whose children were killed by illegal immigrants.
My opponent supports Sanctuary Cities.
But where was the Sanctuary for Kate Steinle?
Where was the Sanctuary for the children of Laura, Michelle, Sabine and Jamiel?
Where was the Sanctuary for every other parent who has suffered so horribly?
These moms and dads don't get a lot of consideration from our politicians.
They certainly don't get apologies.
They'll never even get the time of day from Hillary Clinton.
But they will always come first to me.
Listen closely: we will deliver justice for all of these American Families.
We will create a system of immigration that makes us all proud.
Hillary Clinton's mistakes destroy innocent lives, sacrifice national security, and betray the working families of this country.
Please remember this: I will never put personal profit before national security.
I will never leave our border open to appease donors and special interests.
I will never support a trade deal that kills American jobs.
I will never put the special interests before the national interest.
I will never put a donor before a voter, or a lobbyist before a citizen.
Instead, I will be a champion for the people.
The establishment media doesn't cover what really matters in this country, or what's really going on in people's lives.
They will take words of mine out of context and spend a week obsessing over every single syllable, and then pretend to discover some hidden meaning in what I said.
Just imagine for a second if the media spent this energy holding the politicians accountable who got innocent Americans like Kate Steinle killed ... she was gunned down by an illegal immigrant who had been deported five times.
Just imagine if the media spent this much time investigating the poverty and joblessness in our inner cities.
Just think about how much different things would be if the media in this country sent their cameras to our border, or to our closing factories, or to our failing schools.
Or if the media focused on what dark secrets must be hidden in the 33,000 emails Hillary Clinton deleted.
Instead, every story is told from the perspective of the insiders.
It's the narrative of the people who rigged the system, never the voice of the people it's been rigged against.
So many people suffering in silence.
No cameras, no coverage, no outrage from a media class that seems to get outraged over just about everything else.
So again, it's not about me.
It's never been about me.
It's about all the people in this country who don't have a voice.
I am running to be their voice.
I am running to be the voice for every forgotten part of this country that has been waiting and hoping for a better future.
I am glad that I make the powerful a little uncomfortable now and again ... including some powerful people in my own party.
Because it means I am fighting for real change.
There's a reason the hedge fund managers, the financial lobbyists, the Wall Street investors, are throwing their money at Hillary Clinton.
Because they know she will make sure the system stays rigged in their favor.
It's the powerful protecting the powerful.
The insiders fighting for the insiders.
I am fighting for you.
Here is the change I propose.
On terrorism, we are going to end the era of nation-building and instead focus on destroying ISIS and Radical Islamic terrorism.
We will use military, cyber and financial warfare and work with any partner in the world, and the Middle East, that shares our goal of defeating terrorism.
I have a message for the terrorists trying to kill our citizens: we will find you, we will destroy you, and we will win.
On immigration, we will temporarily suspend immigration from any place where adequate screening cannot be performed.
All applicants for immigration will be vetted for ties to radical ideology, and we will screen out anyone who doesn't share our values and love our people.
Anyone who believes Sharia law supplants American law will not be given an immigrant visa.
If you want to join our society, then you must embrace our society, our values and our tolerant way of life.
Those who believe in oppressing women, gays, Hispanics, African-Americans and people of different faiths are not welcome to join our country.
We will promote our America values, our American way of life, and our American system of government which are all the best in the world.
My opponent on the other hand wants a 550% increase in Syrian refugees.
Her plan would bring in roughly 620,000 refugees from all refugee-sending nations in her first term, on top of all other immigration.
Hillary Clinton is running to be America's Angela Merkel, and we've seen how much crime and how many problems that's caused the German people.
We have enough problems already, we don't need another one.
On crime, we are going to add more police, more investigators, and appoint the best judges and prosecutors in the world.
We will pursue strong enforcement of federal laws.
The gangs and cartels and criminal syndicates terrorizing our people will be stripped apart one by one.
Their day is over.
On trade, we are going to renegotiate NAFTA, withdraw from the TPP, stand up to China on our terrible trade agreement, and protect every last American job.
Hillary Clinton has supported all of the major trade deals that have stripped this country of its jobs and its wealth.
On taxes, we are going to massively cut tax rates for workers and small businesses ... creating millions of new good paying jobs.
We are going to get rid of regulations that send jobs overseas and we are going to make it easier for young Americans to get the credit they need to start a small business and pursue their dreams.
On education, we are going to give students choice, and allow charter schools to thrive.
We are going to end tenure policies that reward bad teachers and hurt good ones.
My opponent wants to deny students choice and opportunity, all to get a little bit more money from the education bureaucracy.
She doesn't care how many young dreams are dashed in the process.
We are going to work closely with African-American parents and students in the inner cities ... and what a big difference that will make.
This means a lot to me, and it is going to be a top priority in a Trump Administration.
On healthcare, we are going to repeal and replace Obamacare.
Countless Americans have been forced into part-time jobs, premiums are about to jump by double-digits yet again, and just this week Aetna announced it is pulling out of the exchanges in North Carolina.
We are going to replace this disaster with reforms that give you choice and freedom and control in healthcare ... at a much lower cost.
On political corruption, we are going to restore honor to our government.
In my Administration, I am going to enforce all laws concerning the protection of classified information.
No one will be above the law.
I am going to forbid senior officials from trading favors for cash by preventing them from collecting lavish speaking fees through their spouses when they serve.
I am going to ask my senior officials to sign an agreement not to accept speaking fees from corporations with a registered lobbyist for five years after leaving office, or from any entity tied to a foreign government.
Finally, we are going to bring this country together.
We are going to do it by emphasizing what we all have in common as Americans.
We are going to reject the bigotry of Hillary Clinton, which sees communities of color only as votes and not as human beings worthy of a better future.
If African-American voters give Donald Trump a chance by giving me their vote, the result for them will be amazing.
Look at how badly things are going under decades of Democratic leadership ... look at the schools, look at the 58% of young African-Americans not working.
It is time for change.
What do you have to lose by trying something new?
...
I will fix it.
This means so much to me, and I will work as hard as I can to bring new opportunity to places in our country which have not known opportunity in a very long time.
Hillary Clinton and the Democratic Party have taken African-American votes totally for granted.
Because the votes have been automatically there, there has been no reason for Democrats to produce.
It is time to break with the failures of the past, and to fight for every last American child in this country to have the better future they deserve.
In my Administration, every American will be treated equally, protected equally, and honored equally.
We will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms, and seek a new future built on our common culture and values as one American people.
This is the change I am promising all of you: an honest government, a fair economy, and a just society for each and every American.
But we can never fix our problems by relying on the same politicians who created these problems in the first place.
72% of voters say our country is on the wrong track.
I am the change candidate, Hillary Clinton is the failed status quo.
It is time to vote for a New American Future.
Together, We will make America strong again.
We will make American proud again.
We will make America safe again.
Friends and fellow citizens: Come November, we will make America great again.
Thank You, and God Bless.
We are going to declare our independence from media executives that don't care about us, and politicians who don't listen to us.
We are going to declare our independence from rising crime, soaring poverty and crushing debt.
We are going to declare our independence from failures of the past and create a New American Future.
Once again, we will have a government of, by, and for the people.
Americanism, not globalism, will be our credo.
It's going to be America First from now on.
Let me tell you what this new future looks like.
We are going to cut taxes and create millions of new jobs.
We are going to repeal and replace Obamacare.
We are going to appoint judges who will support, defend and uphold the Constitution of the United States.
We are going to save and cherish the 2nd amendment.
We will ensure every Veteran in this country has the right to seek medical treatment at a VA facility, or with the private doctor of their choice.
We're going to eliminate job-killing regulations.
We are going to unleash an American Energy Revolution.
Let's talk about another issue that is important to our future, and the future of our children.
That's the issue of crime.
Violent crime is rising across the country.
More than 2,700 have been shot in Chicago alone this year.
No American should consider this level of crime acceptable.
Every American has the right to live in safety and peace.
A Trump Administration is going to restore law and order.
Let me take this opportunity to thank our wonderful police and law enforcement officers.
This state has known unbelievable heartache in recent days after the murder of 5 police officers, and the wounding of another 7, in the assault on Dallas.
We pray for the families, and hope for the speedy recovery of the wounded.
To all law enforcement in America: we are with you, we support you, and we will always stand with you.
Together, we will create a safe community for every citizen in the land ... but especially those who have not known safety in a very, very long time.
That includes appointing an Attorney General and a Secretary of Homeland Security who are completely committed to upholding the law.
I will appoint federal officials and investigators who will work hand-in-hand with police and citizens to dismantle gangs, cartels and criminal syndicates terrorizing our people.
I will appoint prosecutors who will go into the most dangerous communities in America and work to liberate our citizens from violence and fear.
All citizens deserve to be protected.
No American left behind.
I want every African-American parent in this country ... and all parents in this country ... to be able to raise their kids in safety.
And I want to ensure every African-American child in this country ... and all children in this country ... are put on the American ladder of success: a good education, and a good-paying job.
We are going to have school choice, charter schools, and merit-pay for teachers.
My opponent, Hillary Clinton, discriminates against African-American students by opposing school choice because she is owned and paid for by the education bureaucracy.
No one owns me.
I answer only to the American people.
In a New York Post column, Deroy Murdock, published data confirming what I've been saying about the devastating economic conditions in the African-American communities.
Murdock confirms these facts:
"The overall labor force participation rate for black Americans has slipped from 63.2 percent to 61.2 percent ... down 3.2 percent.
This metric also slumped for black teenagers, from 29.6 percent to 27.7 percent ... down 6.4 percent.
The percentage of black Americans in poverty has grown under Obama, the Census Bureau reports, from 25.8 percent in 2009 to 26.2 percent in 2014 ... up 1.6 percent.
The number of blacks on Food Stamps soared under Obama ... from 7.4 million in 2009 to 11.7 million in 2014 ... up 58.2 percent.
Also, from Obama's arrival through last June 30, the percentage of black Americans who own homes plunged from 46.1 to 41.7 percent, the Census reports ... down 9.5 percent."
Nearly 4 in 10 African American children live in poverty.
58 percent of young African Americans are not employed.
Homicide is up nearly 50 percent in Washington D.C. and up more than 60 percent in Baltimore.
Violent crime rose 17 percent in the fifty largest US cities.
This is the legacy of President Obama and Hillary Clinton.
To those suffering I say: what do you have to lose by trying something new?
Let me also tell you what you have to gain: more jobs, higher wages, and a massive reduction in the terrible crime plaguing our inner cities.
We are going to turn it all around.
Success must be created for everyone, and available to everyone.
That is how we are going to create a New American Future.
But to make every American safe and prosperous, we must address one of the most vital issues of all: Border Security.
We are going to build a wall.
We are going to enforce the law.
We are going to protect your jobs and wages.
And we are going to keep our country safe.
According to the Texas government, nearly two hundred thousand illegal immigrants were booked into Texas jails between 2011 and 2016.
Collectively, those arrested were responsible for more than half a million criminal offenses, including 1,055 homicides, 5,516 sexual assault charges and more than 50,000 charges of either burglary or theft.
Yet, Hillary Clinton wants a totally, completely open border.
She wants catch-and-release.
Obamacare for illegal immigrants.
Massive amnesty in her first 100 days.
She wants to gut immigration enforcement.
She supports Sanctuary Cities.
She wants to let people overstay their visas without removal.
One lawless order after another.
We must not let it happen.
Hillary Clinton also wants a 550% increase in Syrian refugees.
There have been hundreds of immigrants and their children charged with terrorism inside the United States since 9/11, and a number of terrible attacks like the Boston Bombing, San Bernardino and Orlando.
Yet Hillary Clinton wants to fling open the floodgates even wider.
I want to create safe zones in the Middle East.
My plan suspends visas when we can't perform effective screening, and it puts forward a new ideological screening program to keep out people from our country who don't support our values.
After all, that is what taking the oath of citizenship is all about.
This election will decide whether or not we have a border.
This election will decide whether or not we have a country.
Today I met with the moms of American children killed by illegal immigrants as a result of the policies Hillary Clinton supports.
Hillary Clinton will never meet with these families, she will never hear these stories.
These are all forgotten Americans ... they are not Hollywood or media stars, or big money special interest donors.
She is bought-and-paid-for by the special interests.
This corruption relates closely to another corruption scandal that strikes at the heart of our Democracy.
Every day more and more alarming facts come out.
The scandal I speak of is the State Department's Pay-For-Play Scandal under Hillary Clinton.
If our Secretary of State can be bought, or bribed, or sell or trade government favors, then the whole American system is threatened.
It is a threat to the foundation of Democracy itself.
This is what happens in a Third World country ... it's the failed conditions people flee when they come to America.
America can never elect a candidate who, like Hillary Clinton, did government favors for those giving her family and her foundation massive amounts of cash.
The new revelations about Hillary Clinton's email scandal make clear we have only seen the tip of the iceberg.
Hillary Clinton is desperate to cover-up her crimes.
That's why she deleted 33,000 emails.
That's also why she lied repeatedly to Congress and the American public.
She said she never sent or received classified materials.
That was a lie, proved over and over again.
She claimed she used an insecure email server for the convenience of using only one device.
But she used multiple devices.
Another lie.
Under penalty of perjury, she said she turned over all of her work-related emails.
But the FBI found thousands she never turned over, and now just found another 15,000 more.
Another Clinton lie.
She said she sent nothing marked classified.
A total lie, unmasked to the world.
And more to come.
She said her server was secure, and had no breaches.
But we know now it was completely unsecure, and the FBI Director said it could easily be hacked by our foreign enemies.
More Clinton lies.
Clinton said her lawyers reviewed all of her emails before destroying them.
One more Hillary Clinton lie.
Lie after lie after lie.
Hillary Clinton is unfit to hold public office.
It is impossible to figure out where the Clinton Foundation ends and the State Department begins.
It is now abundantly clear that the Clintons' set up a business to profit from public office.
They sold access and specific actions by and to them for money.
It goes back to the Arkansas days, and it continued during the White House days with the sale of the Lincoln Bedroom to large donors.
But once Bill was out of office the small time Clinton business ... or, more accurately, their crime enterprise ... grew with the roles reversed.
Bill, now an ex-President collected the money for the Clinton Foundation and Hillary Clinton had the public offices to sell; Senator, Secretary of State and for all that time a potential President.
They turned this into an exponentially larger business.
But it was more than a business, it was a continuing big time criminal enterprise.
It involved numerous violations of the conflict of interest and bribery laws and other serious laws of the United States.
The e-mails and phone logs show that the Clinton Foundation and the Clinton Department of State were one and the same.
If you donated to the Clinton Foundation or paid massive speaking fees to Bill Clinton, you got an entry to the Department of State.
Together they constituted the most scandalous and certainly most profitable sale of public office since the Teapot Dome Scandal of the 1920s.
Today a phone log was released for Cheryl Mills.
She was Secretary of State Clinton's Chief of Staff.
You would expect the log to contain only calls concerning Department of State business.
But Cheryl Mills received 148 messages between 2010 and 2012 from the Chief Operating Officer of the Clinton Foundation ... no other individual or group appears to have left that many messages.
We also just learned today that more than half the people who met with Hillary Clinton from outside government while she was Secretary of State were donors to the Foundation.
This creates the nexus which is at the core of a RICO case.
In other words, they merged the two into the Clinton Family racketeering enterprise.
The specific crimes committed to carry out that enterprise are too numerous to cover in this speech.
I walked through two of them yesterday ... the sale of U.S.
Uranium to Russia, and the exemption of a telecom giant from sanctions after they paid Bill Clinton for a speech.
The UBS saga is another one.
Shortly after Hillary Clinton became Secretary of State she went to Geneva and intervened in a dispute concerning secret identities of Americans.
She negotiated a very good deal for UBS and a very bad deal for law enforcement.
Of the 52,000 accounts the U.S. was seeking, the government settled for only 4,450 accounts.
Her intervention was described by Treasury as unusual.
Before her unusual intervention UBS had donated only $60,000 to the Foundation.
After the Clinton favor for UBS, it opened its wallet for big bucks and out came a $600,000 contribution, a $32 million loan and a $1.5 million speaking fee for Bill Clinton.
This is corruption, pure and simple.
This is why I have called for a special prosecutor.
Justice is supposed to be blind.
It's never supposed to be for sale.
In the long-run, there is only one way to end the corruption in our country: elect Donald J. Trump.
Hillary Clinton thinks she is above the law.
Come November, the American people will show her that she is not.
You will be voting for justice, fairness and equality.
You will also be voting for a more inclusive country, where no one is left out.
Another 2 million Latinos have joined the ranks of those in poverty.
Incomes for Latino households have declined by nearly $1,000 under President Obama.
The number of Latino children living in poverty increased by 15 percent.
Our pro-growth, pro-jobs, pro-family agenda is going to bring hope back to every community in our nation.
I will dedicate myself to restore the ladder of success to all those who live in poverty.
We reject the bigotry of Hillary Clinton, who sees communities of color only as votes, not as human beings worthy of a better future.
The era of division is coming to end.
We will create a new future of American unity.
Are you ready for real American change?
It is time to emphasize what we all have in common as Americans.
We will promote our common culture, values and principles.
We will be one nation.
We will be one people.
We will share together one great future.
It's going to be America First.
Together, we will make America proud again.
We will make America prosperous again.
We will make America safe again.
Friends, citizens and fellow Americans: We will make America great again.
We want to achieve a stable, peaceful world with less conflict and more common ground.
I am proposing a new foreign policy focused on advancing America's core national interests, promoting regional stability, and producing an easing of tensions in the world.
This will require rethinking the failed policies of the past.
We can make new friends, rebuild old alliances, and bring new allies into the fold.
I'm proud to have the support of warfighting generals, active duty military, and the top experts who know both how to win ... and how to avoid the endless wars we are caught in now.
Just yesterday, 88 top Generals and Admirals endorsed my campaign.
In a Trump Administration, our actions in the Middle East will be tempered by realism.
The current strategy of toppling regimes, with no plan for what to do the day after, only produces power vacuums that are filled by terrorists.
Gradual reform, not sudden and radical change, should be our guiding objective in that region.
We should work with any country that shares our goal of destroying ISIS and defeating Radical Islamic terrorism, and form new friendships and partnerships based on this mission.
We now have an Administration, and a former Secretary of State, who refuse to say Radical Islamic Terrorism.
Immediately after taking office, I will ask my generals to present to me a plan within 30 days to defeat and destroy ISIS.
This will require military warfare, but also cyber warfare, financial warfare, and ideological warfare ... as I laid out in my speech on defeating Radical Islamic terrorism several weeks ago.
Instead of an apology tour, I will proudly promote our system of government and our way of life as the best in the world ... just like we did in our campaign against communism during the Cold War.
We will show the whole world how proud we are to be American.
At the same time, immigration security is a vital part of our national security.
We only want to admit people to our country who will support our values and love our people.
These are the pillars of a sound national security strategy.
Unlike my opponent, my foreign policy will emphasize diplomacy, not destruction.
Hillary Clinton's legacy in Iraq, Libya, and Syria has produced only turmoil and suffering.
Her destructive policies have displaced millions of people, then she has invited the refugees into the West with no plan to screen them.
Including Veteran healthcare costs, the price of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan could total $6 trillion, according to a report in the Washington Examiner.
Yet, after all this money spent and lives lost, Clinton's policies as Secretary of State have left the Middle East in more disarray than ever before.
Meanwhile, China has grown more aggressive, and North Korea more dangerous and belligerent.
Russia has defied this Administration at every turn.
Putin has no respect for President Obama or Hillary Clinton.
Sometimes it has seemed like there wasn't a country in the Middle East that Hillary Clinton didn't want to invade, intervene or topple.
She is trigger-happy and unstable when it comes to war.
Hillary Clinton is just reckless ... so reckless, in fact, she put her emails on an illegal server that our enemies could easily hack.
Then Clinton's team used a technology called bleachbit to acid wash her emails.
They even took a hammer to some of her 13 phones, to cover her tracks and obstruct justice.
These email records were destroyed after she received a subpoena to turn them over.
In the FBI report, she claimed she couldn't recall important information on 39 occasions.
She can't even remember whether she was trained in classified information, and said she didn't even know the letter "C" means confidential.
If she can't remember such crucial events and information, she is unfit to be Commander-in-Chief.
Her conduct is simply disqualifying.
She talks about her experience, but Hillary Clinton's only foreign policy experience is "failure."
Everywhere she got involved, things got worse.
Let's look back at the Middle East at the very beginning of 2009, before Hillary Clinton was sworn-in.
Libya was stable.
Syria was under control.
Egypt was ruled by a secular President and an ally of the United States.
Iraq was experiencing a reduction in violence.
The group that would become what we now call ISIS was close to being extinguished.
Iran was being choked off by economic sanctions.
Fast-forward to today.
What have the decisions of Obama-Clinton produced?
Libya is in ruins, our ambassador and three other brave Americans are dead, and ISIS has gained a new base of operations.
Syria is in the midst of a disastrous civil war.
ISIS controls large portions of territory.
A refugee crisis now threatens Europe and the United States.
And hundreds of thousands are dead.
In Egypt, terrorists have gained a foothold in the Sinai desert, near the Suez Canal, one of the most essential waterways in the world.
Iraq is in chaos, and ISIS is on the loose.
ISIS has spread across the Middle East, and into the West.
Iran, the world's largest state sponsor of terrorism, is now flush with $150 billion dollars in cash released by the United States ... plus another $1.7 billion dollars in cash ransom payments.
In other words, our country was blackmailed and extorted into paying this unheard-of amount of money.
Worst of all, the Nuclear deal puts Iran, the number one state sponsor of Radical Islamic terrorism, on a path to nuclear weapons.
This is Hillary Clinton's foreign policy legacy.
But that's not all.
President Obama and Hillary Clinton have also overseen deep cuts in our military, which only invite more aggression from our adversaries.
History shows that when America is not prepared is when the danger is greatest.
We want to deter, avoid and prevent conflict through our unquestioned military strength.
Under Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton, defense spending is on track to fall to its lowest level as a share of the economy since the end of World War II.
We currently have the smallest Army since 1940.
The Navy is among the smallest it has been since 1915.
And the Air Force is the smallest it has been since 1947.
When Ronald Reagan left office, our Navy had 592 ships.
When Barack Obama took office, it had 285 ships.
Today, the Navy has just 276 ships.
The average Air Force aircraft is 27 years-old.
We have 2nd generation B-52 bombers ... their fathers flew the same plane.
Our Army has been shrinking rapidly, from 553,000 soldiers in 2009 to just 479,000 today.
In 2009, our Marine Corps had 202,000 active Marines.
Today, it's just 182,000.
Our ship count is below the minimum of 308 that the Navy says is needed to execute its current missions.
President Obama plans to reduce the Army to 450,000 troops...which would hamstring our ability to defend the United States.
It takes 22 years on average to field a major new weapons system.
In 2010, the US spent $554 billion on non-war base defense spending.
In the current year, we are spending $548 billion ... a cut of 10% in real inflation-adjusted dollars.
This reduction was done through what is known as the sequester, or automatic defense budget cuts.
Under the budget agreement, defense took half of the cuts ... even though it makes up only one-sixth of the budget.
As soon as I take office, I will ask Congress to fully eliminate the defense sequester and will submit a new budget to rebuild our military.
This will increase certainty in the defense community as to funding, and will allow military leaders to plan for our future defense needs.
As part of removing the defense sequester, I will ask Congress to fully offset the costs of increased military spending.
In the process, we will make government leaner and more responsive to the public.
I will ask that savings be accomplished through common sense reforms that eliminate government waste and budget gimmicks ... and that protect hard-earned benefits for Americans.
Government-wide, improper government payments are estimated to exceed $135 billion per year, and the amount of unpaid taxes is estimated to be as high as $385 billion.
We can also reduce the size of the federal bureaucracy through responsible workforce attrition ... that is, when employees retire, they can be replaced by a smaller number of new employees.
We can also stop funding programs that are not authorized in law.
Congress spent $320 billion last year on 256 expired laws.
Removing just 5 percent of that will reduce spending by almost $200 billion over 10 years.
The military will not be exempt either ... the military bureaucracy will have to be trimmed as well.
Early in my term, I will also be requesting that all NATO nations promptly pay their bills, which many are not doing right now.
Only 5 NATO countries, including the United States, are currently meeting the minimum requirement to spend 2% of GDP on defense.
Additionally, I will be respectfully asking countries such as Germany, Japan, South Korea and Saudi Arabia to pay more for the tremendous security we provide them.
Finally, we will have at our disposal additional revenues from unleashing American energy.
The Institute for Energy Research cites a "short-run" figure of as much as $36 billion annually from increased energy production.
Using these new funds, I will ask my Secretary of Defense to propose a new defense budget to meet the following long-term goals:
We will build an active Army of around 540,000, as the Army's chief of staff has said he needs.
We now have only 31 Brigade Combat Teams, or 490,000 troops, and only one-third of combat teams are considered combat-ready.
We will build a Marine Corps based on 36 battalions, which the Heritage Foundation notes is the minimum needed to deal with major contingencies ... we have 23 now.
We will build a Navy of 350 surface ships and submarines, as recommended by the bipartisan National Defense Panel ... we have 276 ships now.
And we will build an Air Force of at least 1,200 fighter aircraft, which the Heritage Foundation has shown to be needed to execute current missions ... we have 1,113 now.
We will also seek to develop a state of the art missile defense system.
Under Obama-Clinton, our ballistic missile defense capability has been degraded at the very moment the US and its allies are facing a heightened missile threat from states like Iran and North Korea.
As these potential adversaries grow their missile programs, US military facilities in Asia and the Middle East, as well as our allies, are increasingly in range, with the United States homeland also potentially threatened.
We propose to rebuild the key tools of missile defense, starting with the Navy cruisers that are the foundation of our missile defense capabilities in Europe, Asia, and the Middle East.
The Obama-Clinton administration tried repeatedly to remove our cruisers from service, then refused to modernize these aging ships.
We will start by modernizing our cruisers to provide the Ballistic Missile Defense capability our nation needs; this will cost around $220 million per modernization as we seek to modernize a significant portion of these 22 ships.
As we expand our Navy toward the goal of 350 ships, we will also procure additional modern destroyers that are designed to handle the missile defense mission in the coming years.
Accomplishing this military rebuild will be a fifty-state effort ...every state in the union will be able to take part in rebuilding our military and developing the technologies of tomorrow.
In addition, we will improve the Department of Defense's cyber capabilities.
Hillary Clinton has taught us all how vulnerable we are to cyber hacking.
Which is why one of the first things we must do is to enforce all classification rules, and enforce all laws relating to the handling of classified information.
Hillary Clinton put her emails on a secret server to cover-up her pay-for-play scandals at the State Department.
Nothing threatens the integrity of our Democracy more than when government officials put their public office up for sale.
We will also make it a priority to develop defensive and offensive cyber capabilities at our U.S. Cyber Command, and recruit the best and brightest Americans.
One of my first directives after taking office will be asking the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and all relevant federal departments, to conduct a thorough review of United States cyber defenses and identify all vulnerabilities ... in our power grid, our communications systems, and all vital infrastructure.
I will then ask for a plan to immediately protect those vulnerabilities.
At the same time, we will invest heavily in offensive cyber capabilities to disrupt our enemies, including terrorists who rely heavily on internet communications.
These new investments in cybersecurity, and the modernization of our military, will spur substantial new job creation in the private sector and help create the jobs and technologies of tomorrow.
America must be the world's dominant technological powerhouse of the 21st century, and young Americans ... including in our inner cities ... should get these new jobs.
We must also ensure that we have the best medical care, education and support for our military service members and their families ... both when they serve, and when they return to civilian life.
Our debt to our men and women in uniform is eternal.
To all those who have served this nation, I say: I will never let you down.
We will protect those who protect us.
And we will follow their example of unity.
We will work across all racial and income lines to create One American Nation.
Together, we will have one great American future.
We will be one people, under one God, saluting one American flag.
America will be a prosperous, generous and inclusive society.
We will discard the failed policies and division of the past, and embrace true American change to rebuild our economy, rebuild our inner cities, and rebuild our country.
We will bring back our jobs.
We will make America strong again.
We will make America safe again.
And we will make America great again.
Our vision of hope stands in stark contrast to my opponent's campaign of hate.
Hillary Clinton has been running a hate-filled and negative campaign with no policy, no solutions, and no new ideas.
By contrast, I've been going around the country offering detailed plans for reform.
All of these reform plans are available on our website.
While my opponent slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable, I call you hardworking American patriots who love your country and want a better future for all of our people.
You are mothers and fathers, soldiers and sailors, carpenters and welders.
You are Democrats, Independents and Republicans.
Above all else, you are Americans ... and you are entitled to leadership that honors you, cherishes you and defends you.
Every American is entitled to be treated with dignity and respect in our country.
Whether you vote for me, or whether you vote for someone else, I will be your champion in the White House.
Hillary Clinton represents only the insiders, the donors and the special interests.
I will be speaking more about Hillary Clinton's disqualifying remarks in a minute, but first let me invite onto the stage some people who can tell you themselves what they think of her spiteful comments.
I have some more thoughts on Clinton's remarks I will be sharing momentarily, but first I want to tell you what I am going to do to make your life better.
We've outlined a detailed plan on trade, on immigration, on rebuilding the military, on changing our foreign policy.
I've delivered a plan on defeating Islamic terrorism, on reforming our tax code, on unleashing American energy, and on providing school choice to every disadvantaged child in America.
We've released policy after policy, solution after solution.
Every day, we are putting forward new ideas to make your life better.
The change will start right away, the moment I take my oath of office.
On my first day, we are going to immediately terminate every single unconstitutional executive order signed by President Obama.
Then, I am going to order a review of every single regulation issued over the last eight 
years.
All needless, job-killing regulations will be cancelled.
Millions of new jobs will come pouring in.
We are going to lift the restriction on American energy ... this will create another half a million new jobs a year.
That's just the beginning.
On my first day in office, I am going to ask Congress to send me a bill to immediately repeal and replace disastrous Obamacare ... this will instantly save another 2 million jobs.
I am also going to propose a massive tax reduction to unleash prosperity in every city and state in our country.
On that first day, I am also going to instruct the Department of Commerce to immediately begin a review of all foreign trade practices that unfairly hurt American manufacturing.
I will use every lawful Presidential power to achieve relief for our workers.
You can read the full 7-point trade plan on my website, DonaldJTrump.com.
North Carolina has lost more than 4 in 10 manufacturing jobs since NAFTA.
Bill Clinton signed it, and Hillary Clinton supported it.
Right here in Ashville, you've lost 1 in 5 manufacturing jobs since China joined the World Trade Organization ... another Hillary-backed deal.
Hillary Clinton owes all of you an apology.
And I think you'll get that apology right around the same time Hillary Clinton hands over the 33,000 emails she deleted.
By the way, Hillary Clinton destroyed her emails after she received a congressional subpoena.
They used a special software called bleach bit.
She even made her 13 different phones disappear ... some of them were even destroyed with a hammer.
Hillary Clinton obviously had a whole lot to hide, including her pay-for-play scandals at Secretary of State.
Pay-for-play with UBS, with Russian Uranium, with contracts for her friends and family 
in Haiti.
Nothing is so dangerous to American Democracy as when a public official puts their federal office up for sale.
Hillary Clinton believes she is above the law.
She also believes that she is above all of you.
After months of hiding from the press, Hillary Clinton came out and finally told the world how she feels about the people of this country.
She said tens of millions of patriotic Americans belong in a "basket of deplorables."
She talks about people like they're objects, not human beings.
She said half of our supporters are not even real Americans, and describes the other half as having run out of options ... what she can't understand or accept is that the great majority of this country now sees right through the lies and deceptions of a failed political establishment.
They want change, they want justice, and they want a government that puts the American people first.
Whether our supporters have lost a job to a factory moved to another country, or whether they're a captain in the police department, or a teacher at a local school, they are united by their deep and sophisticated understanding of how our political system has abandoned the people.
For those who have been hit by hard times, they understand better than anyone that it's Hillary Clinton's Wall Street agenda that has crushed the middle class of this country.
Hillary Clinton spoke with hatred in her heart for these working class Americans.
She looks down on them ... she looks down on all the people who make her life possible.
She looks down on the carpenters, plumbers, electricians, lawyers and accountants.
She looks down on the police officers, soldiers, and firefighters supporting our campaign.
She looks down on the people who cook her meals, drive her cars, and dig the coal that powers her electricity.
She called these Americans every name in the book ... racist, sexist, xenophobic, Islamophobic ... she said they were not even American.
Never in history has a major-party presidential candidate so viciously demonized the American voter.
She was attacking millions of moms and dads who love their children and want a better future for all Americans.
What should these parents tell their children about Hillary Clinton's attacks?
To every kid in America tonight, I want you to know: your parents are working so hard to make your life better, and to make your country better ... and if I get the chance, I will fight right alongside them to deliver a better future for everyone.
Clinton made her remarks at a high-dollar fundraiser in Wall Street.
Her goal is simple: to bully the American voter out of voting for change.
The people who rigged the system want to keep things exactly as they are.
They want to keep our terrible trade deals.
They want to trap children in failing government schools.
They want massive regulation to keep small businesses from being able to compete.
Hillary Clinton can never be President of this country.
No one who has such a low opinion of the American people can ever be elected as their President.
Earlier today I had a chance to spend some time with some more of our most amazing Americans.
I spent the afternoon with the National Guard Association of the United States.
These are the heroes who rescue our people in disasters, and who fight our wars.
These heroes are a permanent testament to the courage and character of our nation.
We also honor and remember the lives of the service members who have made the ultimate sacrifice.
There is no greater love than the love shown by the men and women who have laid down their lives for this country and its people.
Our debt to them is eternal and everlasting.
One thing that we must do is to ensure that our men and women in uniform have the best equipment, resources and tools in the world.
We must provide them the best medical care while they serve, and the best medical care when they return home to civilian life.
The Veterans scandals that have occurred under this Administration ... and that have been dismissed by my opponent ... are a permanent stain on this government.
It's just one more way Hillary Clinton only looks out for herself.
We must take care of our Veterans.
That includes giving Veterans the right to choose treatment at either a public VA facility, or the private doctor of their choice.
Just today we learned that the VA has violated a federal law by failing to make its 
performance records available to consumers.
The scandals never seem to end ... but they will, when I'm elected President.
Nothing makes me more proud than to have the support of the men and women who hear the uniform.
We've received endorsements from 120 generals and admirals, these are the people who know how to keep our country safe.
Just today, I was profoundly humbled to gain the endorsement of 13 Medal of Honor recipients.
I can't even begin to say how much it means to me to have the support of these intrepid heroes.
Also, today, I was thrilled to announce that Ambassador R. James Woolsey, former head of the CIA, is now a senior advisor to our campaign.
We are on a mission of change.
That includes a new agenda for our inner cities.
The Democratic Party has run the inner cities for fifty, sixty, seventy years and more.
4 in 10 African-American children live in poverty, including 45% of those under the age of six.
2,900 people have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year.
For those suffering and hurting, I say: give Donald J. Trump a chance.
I will fix it.
What do you have to lose?
Let me also tell you what you have to gain: millions of new jobs, higher wages, and amazing schools.
I will fight for Detroit, for Chicago, for Baltimore, and for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as One American People.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
It is time to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a New American Future.
In this future, we will respect the dignity of all Americans ... and that means great jobs, great schools, and great neighborhoods.
We will keep our children safe ... which includes steadfast support for American law enforcement.
Jobs will return, prosperity will rise, and new factories will come rushing back to our shores.
Government corruption will end.
Honesty will be restored.
Republicans are the Party of Abraham Lincoln and, come November 8th, we will once again have a government of, by and for the people.
We will make America prosperous again.
We will make America safe again.
And will Make America great again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
In 39 days, we are going to win the state of Michigan and we are going to win the White House.
It is going to be a victory for YOU, the American people.
We are going to take on the special interests, the lobbyists, and the powerful politicians that have stolen your jobs, your wealth, and your middle class.
We are going to take on the arrogant, corrupt corporate media that have enabled the global theft of American prosperity ... a theft that has left behind crumbling schools, roads, bridges and a 
depleted military.
It is time to rebuild Detroit.
It is time to rebuild Michigan.
It is time to rebuild the United States of America.
Hillary Clinton has made a living raking in donations from special interests that have ripped the jobs right out of Michigan.
These are the people whose policies raided the jobs from Detroit.
That's how she gets rich ... by taking your jobs and your money away from you.
That's why Hillary Clinton, if she ever got the chance, would 100% approve the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
The deal she called the "Gold Standard."
The TPP will economically devastate Michigan, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and so many other states across this country.
Hillary Clinton's donors want the TPP ... and their wish is her command.
These special interests pay her for speeches.
They pay her Foundation.
They pay her husband.
In return, they GET YOUR JOBS.
Like I've been saying all week, when it comes to Hillary Clinton, all you have to do is remember these words: FOLLOW THE MONEY.
Hillary Clinton praised or pushed TPP on 45 separate occasions.
Her close associate and confidant, Terry McAuliffe, said she'd pass it.
Her husband has talked it up.
Everyone knows she's for it, because she doesn't believe in protecting American Sovereignty.
Hillary Clinton only believes in protecting one thing: her donors.
Of the 262 companies that lobbied for the passage of TPP, 82 or nearly 1 in 3 donated between $21 and $67 million to the Clinton Foundation.
9 companies that lobbied for the passage of TPP paid Hillary Clinton $2.7 million for paid speeches.
Of the 12 signatory countries that are parties to TPP, 3 gave between $6 and $15 million to the Clinton Foundation.
At least 4 lobbyists who are actively lobbying for TPP passage have raised more than $800,000 for her campaign.
On November 8th, We are going to end the Clinton Corruption and we are going to do something that has been a long, long time coming: WE ARE GOING TO PUT AMERICA FIRST.
Hillary Clinton is an insider fighting only for herself and for her donors.
I am an outsider fighting for you.
Hillary Clinton is the one who rigged the system.
We are the ones who are going to change the system so it's fair and just for every American.
We have a movement.
The corrupt establishment is panicking because they know how hard it is to stop us.
The news anchors and the donors and the lobbyists who are used to getting their way are trying to do everything they can to help Hillary Clinton and to cling to their power and prestige.
The arrogant political class doesn't believe in protecting jobs and wages for Americans.
They don't believe in secure borders and strong walls.
These Washington and Wall Street insiders don't believe in hiring more police, producing more American energy, or giving school choice to poor children trapped in failing schools.
For decades, we've talked about the corruption, incompetence, and failures of our leaders.
2016 is our long-awaited chance to fix the problem ... and to hold our politicians accountable.
If you do this one simple thing, you can deliver justice for every single person who has been wronged by the system: show up and vote.
When you cast that ballot, just picture a Wall Street boardroom filled with the special interests who have been bleeding this county dry, and imagine the look on their faces when you tell all of them: you're fired.
In their place, will be a new government.
We are the Party of Abraham Lincoln, and once again, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
We are going to do it together.
In 39 days, everything is going to change.
Now, the media doesn't want to talk about Hillary Clinton and her corruption.
So we are going to spell it out for them today.
The large corporations who support terrible trade deals that ship your jobs overseas ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Follow the money.
The Wall Street investors who have rigged the regulations against the middle class ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Follow the money.
The wealthy donors who want to shut down American energy ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Follow the money.
The special interests who want open borders are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Follow the money.
In her campaign for President, Hillary Clinton has received $100 million dollars in contributions from Wall Street and the hedge funds.
She and Bill were paid $150 million for speeches since Bill left the Oval Office.
The same groups paying Bill and Hillary for their speeches were lobbying the federal government.
Twenty-two groups paying Bill Clinton for speeches lobbied the State Department while Hillary was Secretary of State.
Favors and access were granted to those who wrote checks.
She put the office of Secretary of State up for sale ... and if she ever got the chance, she'd put the Oval Office up for sale too.
She deleted and bleached 33,000 emails after a Congressional subpoena.
13 phones missing, several destroyed with a hammer.
Her staffers taking the fifth amendment, and her ringleaders getting immunity deals.
Foreign enemies with easy access to hack her server.
Lies to Congress, under oath, about turning over her work-related emails.
We are going to call them the FBI Immunity Five.
So here's my question for Hillary Clinton: can you promise that not one of the five people who were granted criminal immunity will ever be allowed to serve in a Clinton Administration?
And here is the demand I am making today to President Obama: will you pledge, here and now, not to issue a pardon to Hillary Clinton and her co-conspirators for their many crimes against our country and society itself?
No one is above the law.
Not even Hillary Clinton.
Clinton and her cronies will say anything, do anything, lie about anything to keep their grip on 
power ... to keep their control over this country.
Remember the Clinton pardon of fugitive Marc Rich, in exchange for unknown and undisclosed amounts of money?
The American people have had it with years, decades, of Clinton Corruption and scandals.
They are tired of the lies, they are tired of the trivial politics, they are tired of being talked down to, looked down upon, and treated like second class citizens.
This will be the year the American people say: Enough is enough.
Hillary Clinton has been a disaster for so many communities, but especially for African-American communities.
I don't think African-Americans are going to come out and vote for Clinton ... they are too smart, and they know they are being used.
They also know that she'll do nothing for them once the election is over ... she never does, and that will never change.
Many of them will never forget her calling young African-American men "super-predators."
To the African-American community, let me ask you this question: are you better off than you were eight years ago?
If not, vote for Donald Trump.
I will bring jobs, great education, and safe neighborhoods.
If you keep voting for the same people, you will keep getting the same results.
Look at what the Democrats have done to Detroit.
Half of Detroit residents do not work.
Nearly 40% of the city lives in poverty.
It's the second most dangerous city in America, according to the FBI.
This is the legacy of the policies embraced by Hillary Clinton.
A Trump Administration will bring prosperity to all of our people.
My economic agenda can be summed up with three very beautiful words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
We are going to pass the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan.
Every wasteful and unnecessary regulation will be eliminated.
We will unleash the power of American energy.
The catastrophe known as Obamacare will be repealed and replaced.
And the disastrous trade deals, like NAFTA, that have caused so much pain in Michigan, will be renegotiated ... and we will bring back your auto-manufacturing.
Michigan has lost more than 1 in 3 of its manufacturing jobs since the twin disasters of NAFTA and China's entrance into the WTO ... both deals pushed by Bill Clinton and supported by Hillary Clinton.
Before NAFTA went into effect, there were 280,000 auto workers in Michigan.
Today, that number is only 160,000.
Ford is moving its small car production to Mexico.
It used to be that the cars were made in Flint and you couldn't drink the water in Mexico.
Today, the cars are made in Mexico and you can't drink the water in Flint.
Hillary Clinton also gave us the job-killing trade deal with South Korea, which has cost this country another 100,000 jobs.
Hillary opposed the Korea deal when she was running for President in 2007.
She campaigned right here in Michigan and said the Korea deal "will hurt the us auto industry, increase our trade deficit, cost us good middle-class jobs and make America less competitive."
She pledged to reject the deal.
But she lied to all of you, just like she lied about her emails.
Once installed as Secretary of State, she supported it and called it a "cutting-edge deal."
She rammed it through to adoption ... she always does whatever the donors tell her to do, no matter how it impacts our families, schools and communities.
The U.S. trade deficit with Korea in the top ten products that Michigan exports to Korea grew 54 percent as exports fell and imports rose.
This is what Hillary Clinton did to your state.
According to the Economic Policy Institute, Michigan ranks first for jobs lost as a share of workforce due to the trade deficit with TPP members, and the country lost 740,000 manufacturing jobs as a result of that deficit last year.
Just imagine how many more automobile jobs will be lost if the TPP is actually approved, as Hillary Clinton is planning to do.
Hillary Clinton is merely a vessel for the special interests trying to strip this country of its wealth, its jobs, and its status as a sovereign nation.
She even supports the disastrous surrender of America's control of the internet, which is happening tomorrow.
Hillary Clinton's website says she supports the decision to give away the internet to a "global community of stakeholders."
Someone needs to inform Hillary Clinton it's not the job of our leaders to represent a "global community."
It's the job of our leaders to represent American citizens.
Losing control of the internet to other foreign entities is just one more way Obama-Clinton have sold out the citizens of this country.
Hillary Clinton is a globalist who will never protect the freedom and jobs of the American people.
I am not running to be President of the World.
I am running to be President of the United States of America.
Have you ever wondered why it is that all the things that the American people want never seem to happen?
The reason for this is simple.
It's because the financial interests who control our politics and our media don't want these changes to happen.
Hillary Clinton has been there for 30 years, and has never done anything for you and your 
family.
Just look at how badly she messed up on the Iran deal.
And, just today, we learned that on the same day as the hostages were released, the United States signed an agreement lifting sanctions on two Iranian banks involved in financing Iran's missile programs.
Hillary Clinton is there for only one reason, to protect her donors and collect their money.
Our campaign is taking on big business, big media and big donors ... we're taking them on for YOU.
So you can have the future you want.
Our campaign is about breaking-up the special interest monopoly in Washington, D.C. We're trying to disrupt the collusion between the wealthy donors, the large corporations, and the media executives.
They're all part of the same corrupt political establishment.
And they nod along when Hillary Clinton slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable.
I call you hardworking American Patriots and together we are going to save this country.
Together, we can accomplish anything we want.
But that means you need to show up and vote on November 8th.
You have 39 days until the election.
You have 39 days to make every dream you ever dreamed 
for your country come true.
Do Not Let This Chance Slip Away.
You have one magnificent chance to deliver justice for every forgotten man, woman and child in this nation.
The arrogance of Washington, D.C. will soon come face to face with the righteous verdict of the 
American voter.
On November 8th, we are going to show the whole world that America is Back ...
Bigger and Better and Stronger than ever before.
Here are just some of the great things that will happen for your country:
We are going to lower your taxes; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; repeal and replace job-killing Obamacare; make childcare more affordable; bring our manufacturing jobs back to Michigan; end illegal immigration; keep Radical Islamic terrorists out of our country; save the 2nd amendment; support the men and women of law enforcement; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
We will rebuild our roads, bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools and hospitals.
American cars ... made in Michigan ... will travel the roads, American planes will soar in the skies, and American ships will patrol the seas.
American steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds.
American hands will rebuild this nation ... and American energy, mined from American sources, will power this nation.
American workers will be hired to do the job.
We will put new American steel into the spine of this country.
I will fight for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
To the people of Michigan, I promise you this ...
We will make America wealthy again.
We will make America strong again.
We will make America safe again.
And we will make America great again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
In 26 days, we are going to win the state, and we are going to win the White House.
Our movement is about replacing a failed and corrupt political establishment with a new government controlled by you, the American People.
There is nothing the political establishment will not do, and no lie they will not tell, to hold on to their prestige and power at your expense.
The Washington establishment, and the financial and media corporations that fund it, exists for only one reason: to protect and enrich itself.
The establishment has trillions of dollars at stake in this election.
As an example, just one single trade deal they'd like to pass, involves trillions of dollars controlled by many countries, corporations and lobbyists.
For those who control the levers of power in Washington, and for the global special interests they partner with, our campaign represents an existential threat.
This is not simply another 4-year election.
This is a crossroads in the history of our civilization that will determine whether or not We The People reclaim control over our government.
The political establishment that is trying everything to stop us, is the same group responsible for our disastrous trade deals, massive illegal immigration, and economic and foreign policies that have bled this country dry.
The political establishment has brought about the destruction of our factories and our jobs, as they flee to Mexico, China and other countries throughout the world.
Our just-announced jobs numbers are anemic, and our gross domestic product, or GDP, is barely above one percent.
Workers in the United States, were making less than they were almost 20 years ago ... and yet they are working harder.
It's a global power structure that is responsible for the economic decisions that have robbed our working class, stripped our country of its wealth, and put that money into the pockets of a handful of large corporations and political entities.
Just look at what this corrupt establishment has done to our cities like Detroit and Flint, Michigan ... and rural towns in Pennsylvania, Ohio, North Carolina and across our country.
They have stripped these towns bare, and raided the wealth for themselves and taken away their jobs.
The Clinton Machine is at the center of this power structure.
We've seen this firsthand in the WikiLeaks documents in which Hillary Clinton meets in secret with international banks to plot the destruction of U.S. sovereignty in order to enrich these global financial powers.
And, likewise, the emails show that the Clinton Machine is so closely and irrevocably tied to media organizations that she is given the questions and answers in advance of her debates.
Clinton is also given approval and veto power over quotes written about her in the New York Times.
And the emails show the reporters collaborate and conspire directly with the Clinton Campaign on helping her win the election.
With their control over our government at stake, with trillions of dollars on the line, the Clinton Machine is determined to achieve the destruction of our campaign, which has now become a movement the likes of which our country has never seen before ... and we won't let them do that.
The most powerful weapon deployed by the Clintons is the corporate media.
Let's be clear on one thing: the corporate media in our country is no longer involved in journalism.
They are a political special interest, no different than any lobbyist or other financial entity with an agenda.
And their agenda is to elect the Clintons at any cost, at any price, no matter how many lives they destroy.
For them, it is a war ... and for them, nothing is out of bounds.
This is a struggle for the survival of our nation.
This election will determine whether we are a free nation, or whether we have only the illusion of Democracy but are in fact controlled by a small handful of global special interests rigging the system.
This is not just conspiracy but reality, and you and I know it.
The establishment and their media enablers wield control over this nation through means that are well known.
Anyone who challenges their control is deemed a sexist, a racist, a xenophobe and morally deformed.
They will attack you, they will slander you, they will seek to destroy your career and reputation.
And they will lie, lie and lie even more.
The Clintons are criminals.
This is well-documented, and the establishment that protects them has engaged in a massive cover-up of widespread criminal activity at the State Department and Clinton Foundation in order to keep the Clintons in power.
Never in history have we seen such a cover-up as this, one that includes the destruction of 33,000 emails, 13 phones, laptops, missing boxes of evidence, and on and on.
People who are capable of such crimes against our nation are capable of anything.
And so now we address the slander and libels that was just last night thrown at me by the Clinton Machine, the New York Times, and other media outlets, as part of a concerted, coordinated and vicious attack.
It is not coincidence that these attacks come at the exact same moment, and all together at the same time, as the WikiLeaks documents expose the massive international corruption of the Clinton Machine ... including 2,000 more emails this morning
These claims about me of inappropriate conduct with women are totally and absolutely false ... and the Clinton Machine knows it is.
It's all fabricated.
It's pure fiction and outright lies.
These events never happened.
The claims are preposterous, ludicrous and defy truth, common sense and logic.
We already have substantial evidence to dispute these lies, and it will be made public in the appropriate way and at the appropriate time.
These lies come from outlets whose past stories, and past claims, have already been discredited.
The media outlets did not even attempt to confirm the most basic facts, because even a simple investigation would have shown these are false smears.
What's happening to me is no different than what happened to other innocent people, like the story written in Rolling Stone Magazine ... and that magazine should be put out of business.
Six months ago, the New York Times wrote a massive story attacking me, and the central witness they used said the story was false, that she was quoted inaccurately.
She said I was a great guy, and never made those remarks.
We demanded a retraction, but they refused to print it ... just like they refused to print the comments from another source who praised me in her book, or the words of another wonderful woman who said nice things.
That story was a fraud and an embarrassment to the New York Times.
It will be part of the lawsuit we are preparing against them.
Now today, the same two discredited writers, who should have been fired from the times, tell a totally fabricated and false story that supposedly took place on an airplane more than 30 years ago ... another ridiculous tale, no witnesses, no nothing.
Also, a writer from people magazine who wrote a story on Melania and myself on our first anniversary.
The story was lovely but last night we hear, after 12 years, a new claim that I made inappropriate advances.
I ask a very simple question, why wasn't it part of the story that appeared 12 years ago?
I was one of the biggest stars on television, and it would have been one of the biggest stories of the year.
Take a look at her words.
It would have been the headline.
No, it only appears 26 days before the election.
This invented account has already been debunked by eyewitness testimony ... the very witness identified by the author has said the story is entirely false.
This weekend, the New York Times published a full-page hit piece with another claim from an individual who has been totally discredited based on the emails and letters she has sent to our office over the years.
But the New York Times refused to use the evidence we presented them.
Others have likewise were presented with this story, but after seeing the evidence we provided, refused to print it.
This is part of a concerted effort, led by the New York Times, which is fighting desperately for its relevance and survival, and which probably won't even be around in a few years based on its financial outlook, has become more and more vicious and vile.
I will not allow the Clinton Machine to turn this campaign into a discussion of their slanders and lies, but will remain focused on the issues facing the American people.
But let me state this as clearly as I can.
These attacks are orchestrated by the Clintons and their media allies.
They are false and slanderous in every respect.
We are now less than a month from the most important election of our lifetime ... indeed one the most important elections in modern history ... and the polls show us in a dead heat.
And the new Rasmussen poll shows us 2 points ahead.
So now, the Clinton Machine, has put forward a small handful of people out of the tens of thousands I have met, worked with and employed ... in order to make wild and false allegations that fail to meet even the most basic test of common sense.
Again, this is nothing more than an attempt to destroy our movement and for the Clintons to keep their corrupt control over this government.
When I declared my candidacy, I knew what bad shape our country was in.
I had seen firsthand the corruption and the sickness that has taken over our politics.
I knew they would throw every lie they could at me, and my family, and my loved ones.
I knew they would stop at nothing to try to stop me.
But I take all of these slings and arrows for you.
I take them for our movement, so that we can have our country back.
Our great civilization, here in America and across the civilized world, has come upon a moment of reckoning.
We've seen it in the United Kingdom, where they voted to liberate themselves from global government and global trade deals and global immigration deals that have destroyed their sovereignty.
But the central base of world political power is here in America, and it is our corrupt political establishment that is the greatest power behind the efforts at radical globalization and the disenfranchisement of working people.
Their financial resources are unlimited.
Their political resources are unlimited.
Their media resources are unlimited.
And, most importantly, the depths of their immorality is unlimited.
Our political establishment has no soul.
I knew these false attacks would come.
I knew this day would arrive.
And I knew the American people would rise above it and vote for the future they deserve.
The only thing that can stop the Corrupt Clinton Machine is you.
The only force strong enough to save this country is you.
The only people brave enough to vote out this corrupt establishment is you, the American People.
They control the Department of Justice, and they even clandestinely meet with the Attorney General of the United States ... in the back of her airplane, while on the runway ... for 39 minutes ... to most likely discuss her reappointment in a Clinton Administration just prior to the Attorney General making a decision over whether or not to prosecute Hillary Clinton.
Likewise, they have corrupted the Director of the FBI to the point at which stories are already saying the great men and women who work for the FBI are embarrassed and ashamed to what he's done to one of our great institutions.
Hillary Clinton is guilty of all of the things that Director Comey stated at his press conference and Congressional hearings, and far more ... and yet he let her off the hook, while others lives are being destroyed for far less.
This is a conspiracy against you, the American people.
This is our moment of reckoning as a society and as a civilization.
I didn't need to do this.
I built a great company, and I had a wonderful life.
I could have enjoyed the benefits of years of successful business for myself and my family, instead of going through this absolute horror show of lies, deceptions and malicious attacks.
I'm doing it because this country has given me so much, and I feel strongly it was my turn to give back.
Some people warned me this campaign would be a journey to hell.
But they are wrong, it will be a journey to heaven because we will help so many people.
In my former life, I was an insider as much as anybody else ... and I know what's like to be an insider.
Now I am being punished for leaving their special club and revealing to you their great scam.
Because I used to be part of the club, I'm the only one who can fix it.
I'm doing this for the people, and this movement is just right ... and we will take back this country for you and Make America Great Again.
The corrupt establishment knows that we are an existential threat to their criminal enterprise.
They know, that if we win, their power is gone and returned to you.
The clouds hanging over our government can be lifted, and replaced with a bright future ... but it all depends on whether we let the New York Times decide our future, or whether we let the American people decide our future.
If this Clinton Campaign of Destruction is allowed to work, then no other highly successful person ... which is what our country needs ... will ever again run for this office.
I will not lie to you.
These false attacks hurt.
To be lied about, to be slandered, to be smeared so publicly and before your family, is painful.
What the Clinton Machine is doing to me, and my family, is egregious beyond words.
It is reprehensible beyond description.
But I also know, it's not about me ... it's about all of you.
It's about all of us, together, as a country.
It's about the Veterans who need medical care, the mothers who've lost children to terrorism and crime, it's about the inner cities and the border towns who desperately need our help, it's about the millions of jobless Americans.
This election is about the people being crushed by Obamacare, and it's about defeating ISIS and appointing Supreme Court Justices who will defend our Constitution.
This election is also about the African-American and Hispanic communities whose communities have been plunged into crime, poverty and failing schools by the policies of Hillary Clinton.
They've robbed these citizens of their future, and I will give them their hope, jobs and opportunities back.
I will deliver.
This election is about every man, woman and child in our country who deserves to live in safety, prosperity and peace.
We will rise above the lies, the smears, and the ludicrous slanders from ludicrous reporters.
We will vote for the country we want.
We will vote for the future we want.
We will vote for the politics we want.
We will vote to put this corrupt government cartel out of business.
We will remove from our politics the special interests who have betrayed our workers, our borders, our freedoms, and our sovereign rights as a nation.
We will end the politics of profit, we will end the rule of special interests, we will put a stop to the raiding of our country ... and the disenfranchisement of our people.
Our Independence Day is at hand, and it arrives, finally, on November 8th.
Join me in taking back our country, and creating a bright and glorious new dawn for our people.
As you have heard, it was just announced yesterday that the FBI is reopening their investigation into the criminal and illegal conduct of Hillary Clinton.
This is the biggest political scandal since Watergate, and it is everybody's deepest hope that justice, at last, can be delivered.
Hillary has nobody but herself to blame for her mounting legal troubles.
Her criminal action was willful, deliberate, intentional and purposeful.
Hillary set-up an illegal server for the obvious purpose of shielding her criminal conduct from public disclosure.
She set-up this illegal server knowing full well that her actions put our national security at risk, and put the safety and security of your children at risk.
To further cover-up her crimes, she bleached and deleted 33,000 emails after a Congressional Subpoena, made 13 phones disappear ... some with a hammer, lied to Congress under oath, lied to the FBI, and then two boxes of email evidence went mysteriously missing.
She even pretended not to know that the letter "C" meant confidential information that was classified.
As the recent release of a memo from one of Bill Clinton's closest associates demonstrates, the Clintons have turned the government into a scheme for personal profit.
The Clintons even saw the deadly disaster in Haiti as an opportunity to cash-in.
The WikiLeaks revelations have revealed a degree of corruption at the highest levels of our government like nothing we've ever seen before ... including a candidate who boasts to donors about having a public position for the voters, and a private position for Wall Street.
Hillary put the office of Secretary of State up for sale and, if she ever got the chance, she'd put the Oval Office up for sale too.
Hillary should have been convicted long ago.
That the legal process has been taking this long is incredible.
And now it's reported that the Department of Justice is fighting the FBI ... that's because the Department of Justice is trying to protect her.
97% of Department of Justice employees' presidential contributions went to Hillary Clinton.
There are those, and I happen to be one of them, who think Hillary offered Lorretta Lynch a reappointment as Attorney General.
Perhaps that was what Bill Clinton was doing in the secret meeting on the tarmac in Arizona.
He said it was to play golf, but he never played, and it was over 100 degrees.
This is what we mean when we call it a rigged system.
Now the Attorney General is fighting the FBI for doing what was right ... but what should have been done many months ago.
Perhaps, through this other investigation, they found what may be some of the 33,000 missing and deleted emails Hillary tried desperately to destroy, even going so far as to use digital bleach.
The stakes on November 8th could not be higher.
A vote for Hillary is vote a to surrender our government to public corruption, graft and cronyism that threatens the very foundations of our Constitutional system.
What makes us exceptional is that we are a nation of laws, and that we are all equal under those laws ... Hillary's corruption shreds that foundational principle.
Public Corruption is a grave and profound threat to a Democracy.
Government corruption spreads outward, like a cancer, and infects the operations of government itself.
If the corruption is not removed, then the people are not able to have faith in their government.
It deadens and saps the spirit of civic participation.
Corruption decays our trust in institutions and our legal system.
When the outcome is fixed, when the system is rigged, people lose hope.
They detach.
Our society becomes unplugged and unhinged.
When the powerful can get away with anything, because they have the money and the connections to rig the system, then the laws lose their moral authority.
Hillary believes money and power ... not truth and justice ... should rule the day.
As FDR once said, government by organized money is just as dangerous as government by organized mob.
This is what we often see in Third World countries ... where the governments are often run by a small handful of corrupt people for their personal enrichment.
Corruption is corrosive to every institution of government, and it must be stopped.
Restoring honesty to our government, and the rule of law to our society, will be my highest priority as President.
We must save the America.
That is why My Contract With The American Voter begins with a plan to end government corruption and take our country back from the special interests.
I want the entire corrupt Washington establishment to hear and to heed the words I am about to say.
When we win on November 8th, We Are Going To Washington, D.C. And We Are Going To DRAIN THE SWAMP.
A Trump Administration will immediately repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare.
It's just been announced that the citizens of Arizona are going to experience a 116 percent increase in their Obamacare premiums.
Elect me, and WE WILL STOP THE PREMIUM HIKES FOR GOOD.
WE WILL STOP THE MADNESS OF OBAMACARE.
Every single one of Arizona's 15 counties is losing insurers next year because of Obamacare.
In Phoenix, there are 8 Obamacare insurers this year.
Next year there will be only one.
And it was announced this week that Obamacare premiums in Phoenix will go up 145% next year.
One insurer in the state will have a $14,000 deductible.
Obamacare is a catastrophe for Arizona, and a catastrophe for all of America.
Even Bill Clinton admitted Obamacare is "the craziest thing in the world," where "people wind up with their premiums doubled and their coverage cut in half."
In Minnesota, where the premium increase will be close to 60 percent, the Democratic Governor has said "the Affordable Care Act is no longer affordable."
Jonathan Gruber, the architect of Obamacare, admitted it was all a fraud, and he said, outrageously, that it was passed because of the "stupidity of the American voter."
Hillary Clinton wants to double-down on Obamacare, making it even more expensive.
My Contract With the American Voter outlines a plan to repeal and replace Obamacare, and I'm asking for your vote so we can save healthcare for every family in Arizona.
Real change also means getting rid of the corruption in Washington.
As you have heard, it was just announced yesterday that the FBI is reopening their investigation into the criminal and illegal conduct of Hillary Clinton.
This is the biggest political scandal since Watergate, and it is everybody's deepest hope that justice, at last, can be delivered.
Hillary has nobody but herself to blame for her mounting legal troubles.
Her criminal action was willful, deliberate, intentional, and purposeful.
Hillary set-up an illegal server for the obvious purpose of shielding her criminal conduct from public disclosure ... and exposure.
She set-up this illegal server knowing full well that her actions put our national security at risk, and put the safety and security of your children at risk.
But she didn't care ... as long as she and Bill got the money, the safety of your family didn't matter.
To cover-up her crimes, she bleached and deleted 33,000 emails after receiving a Congressional Subpoena, made 13 phones disappear ... some with a hammer, lied to Congress under oath, lied to the FBI many times, and then two boxes of email evidence went mysteriously missing.
The WikiLeaks revelations have exposed criminal corruption at the highest levels of our government.
Hillary put the office of Secretary of State up for sale and, if she ever got the chance, she'd put the Oval Office up for sale too.
She'd put it up for sale to special interests and foreign dictators ... whoever offers the highest price.
Yet, now it's reported that the Department of Justice is fighting the FBI ... that's because the Department of Justice is trying to protect Hillary Clinton.
97% of Department of Justice employee's presidential contributions went to Hillary Clinton.
There are those, and I happen to be one of them, who think Hillary offered Lorretta Lynch a reappointment as Attorney General if she were to become President.
Perhaps that was what Bill Clinton was arranging when he met with Attorney General Lynch on her airplane on the tarmac right here in Arizona.
This is what we mean when we say the system is rigged.
A vote for Hillary is a vote to surrender our government to public corruption, graft and cronyism that threatens the survival of our Constitutional system itself.
What makes us exceptional is that we are a nation of laws, and that we are all equal under those laws ... Hillary's corruption shreds the principle on which our nation was founded.
Government corruption spreads outward, like a cancer, infecting the whole operation of our government.
When the outcome is fixed, when the system is rigged, people lose hope ... they stop dreaming, they stop trying.
When the powerful can get away with anything, because they have the money and the connections to rig the system, then people lose confidence in our laws and in our future.
Hillary's corruption is corrosive to the soul of our nation, and it must be stopped.
As FDR once said, "government by organized money is just as dangerous as government by organized mob."
Hillary believes money and power ... not truth and justice ... should rule the day.
We have one ultimate check on Hillary's corruption, and that is the power of voting.
The only way to beat the corruption is to show up and vote by the tens of millions, including millions of people voting for the first time in their entire lives.
Vote with all of your heart and soul to Make America Great Again.
Restoring honesty to our government, and the rule of law to our society, will be my highest priority as President.
Haven't we had enough drama with the Clintons?
Bill Clinton was impeached for lying and obstructing justice, signed the worst trade deal in history, NAFTA, which emptied our country of it's manufacturing jobs, and he doesn't even have the right to practice law.
Hillary has brought scandal or destroyed everything she touched.
Look at Whitewater, cattle futures, jobs in Upstate New York, or look at Syria, Iraq, Libya, and now her emails.
This will be the year the American people say: enough is enough.
This will be the year the American people break with the bitter failures of the past and embrace a new and optimistic future.
My Contract With The American Voter begins with a plan to end government corruption.
I want the entire corrupt Washington establishment to hear and to heed the words we are all about to say.
When we win on November 8th, We Are Going To Washington, D.C. And We Are Going To DRAIN THE SWAMP.
At the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs.
Right now, 70 million American women and children live in poverty, or near the brink of poverty.
America has lost one-third of its manufacturing jobs since Bill and Hillary's NAFTA.
America has lost 70,000 factories since China entered the World Trade Organization.
We are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world.
Hillary's goal is to send millions and millions more jobs out of our country.
Hillary is going to raise taxes up to 45 percent, massively expand regulation, shut down American energy, and push through terrible trade deals that offshore our jobs for the benefit of her donors.
Her policies will cause a major recession, or even a depression.
A Trump Administration will stop TPP, renegotiate NAFTA, and we are going to stand up to China on Currency Manipulation.
We are going to lower taxes on American business from 35 percent to 15 percent.
We are going to cut taxes for Middle Class families by hundreds of billions of dollars.
My infrastructure plan will provide help for projects like the proposed Interstate-11, which would connect Phoenix with Las Vegas and other areas.
We will also unleash the full power of American energy including shale, oil, natural gas and clean coal.
We will become a rich nation once again.
But to be a rich country, we must also be a safe country.
A Trump Administration will also secure and defend the borders of the United States.
And yes, we will build a wall.
We have the endorsement of America's ICE and Border Patrol Officers, the first time they have ever made an endorsement.
When Hillary Clinton was Secretary of State she allowed thousands of the most dangerous criminal aliens in the world to go free inside America because their home countries wouldn't take them back.
These were people guilty of murder, assault, rape, and all manner of violent crime.
Hillary has pledged "open borders," and supports Sanctuary Cities.
Countless Americans are killed by illegal immigrants because our government won't do it's job.
These include amazing Americans like Sergeant Brandon Mendoza, of Mesa Arizona, who was killed by an illegal immigrant with a criminal record who should have been deported ... but the government refused to act.
I've spent time with his incredible mother.
28-year-old Park Ranger Kris Eggle was shot and killed by a drug cartel hit squad responsible for a number of murders.
Kris died trying to protect our borders from drug and weapon trafficking into the Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument.
33-year-old Phoenix Police Officer Nick Erfle, a young cancer survivor, was murdered by a previously- deported illegal immigrant with a felony warrant.
Nick was shot twice in the back of the head.
21-year-old Grant Ronnebeck, was working at a convenience store in Mesa Arizona when he was shot point blank by an illegal immigrant.
His illegal immigrant killer, despite a criminal record, was out on bond, roaming free.
When I become President, this crime wave ends.
We are going to cancel all federal funding for Sanctuary Cities.
We are going to impose tough prison sentences for illegal immigrants who return after a previous deportation.
We will end illegal immigration, deport every last criminal alien, and save American lives.
We will also repeal the Obama-Clinton defense sequester and rebuild our badly depleted military.
We have the endorsements of over 200 Admirals and Generals and 22 Medal of Honor Recipients.
Our Air Force is the smallest and oldest it has ever been, and my plan builds the modern, advanced fighter aircraft we need ... fighters like those that will be stationed at Luke Air Force Base.
Our Army is the smallest it has been since before World War II, and we will significantly increase both the size of our Army and the emphasis we place on intelligence ... that means supporting the men and women at Fort Huachuca, home of the Army's Intelligence Center.
Places like Marine Corps Air Station Yuma will have new aircraft ... they won't have to get spare parts from museums anymore.
We also need a new foreign policy that puts America First.
Hillary's policies unleashed ISIS, empowered Iran, and spread death and destruction across the Middle East.
Hillary and our failed Washington Establishment have spent $6 trillion on wars in the Middle East, and now it's in worse shape than ever before.
Our failed establishment has betrayed the American worker and family.
They've dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe, they have left our borders wide open at home, and they've shipped our jobs and wealth to other countries.
To all Americans I say: it is time for new leadership.
Just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days ...
We are going to have the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan; eliminate every unnecessary job-killing regulation; cancel every illegal Obama executive order; stop the massive inflow of refugees and keep Radical Islamic Terrorist out of our country; rebuild our military and take care of our Vets; reduce surging crime and support the men and women of law enforcement; provide school choice and put an end to Common Core; save the 2nd amendment; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
Americans are tired of being told by politicians that they have to defer their dreams to another day, but they really mean another decade.
Hillary has been there for 30 years, and she has accomplished nothing ... she's just made things worse.
She is the candidate of yesterday.
We are the movement of the future.
Our movement represents all Americans, from all backgrounds, and all walks of life.
We are asking for the votes of Republicans, Democrats, Independents, and first-time voters.
We are fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people ... not the donors and special interests.
We are fighting to unlock the potential of every American community, and every American family, who yearns for a better future.
With your vote, we are just 10 days away from the change you've been waiting for your entire life.
Together, We Will Make America JUST Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
In 22 days, we are going to win the state of Wisconsin and we are going to win the White House.
Early voting is underway, so make sure to send in your absentee ballots.
Together, we are going to deliver real change that puts America First.
We are going to renegotiate our terrible trade deals, end illegal immigration, stop the massive inflow of refugees, reduce surging crime, cut taxes and regulations, lift the restrictions on American energy, end common core, and repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare.
Your jobs will come back under a Trump Administration.
Your incomes will go up under a Trump Administration.
Your taxes will go way down under a Trump Administration.
Your companies won't be leaving Wisconsin under a Trump Administration.
We are also going to end government corruption.
Hillary Clinton is the most corrupt person ever to run for President.
Newly-released FBI documents made public today reveal just how deep the corruption goes.
The under-Secretary of State, Patrick Kennedy, pressured the FBI to un-classify emails from Hillary's illegal server.
In other words, the State Department was trying to cover-up Hillary's crime of sending classified information on a server our enemies could easily access by trying to reverse the classification.
This is a criminal conspiracy ... a conspiracy that included Hillary's deleting and bleaching of 33,000 emails, the disappearance of 13 phones, 2 boxes of email evidence gone missing, and the destruction of laptops in a secret deal with the FBI.
Remember, also, that Hillary lied under oath to Congress saying she had never sent or received classified information on her insecure sever, and pretended not to know that the letter "C" meant confidential information that was classified.
Hillary then told the FBI she couldn't remember 39 times, and then, in written testimony last week under oath, said she couldn't remember another 21 times.
We are witnessing a criminal enterprise that has turned our government into a vehicle for the Clinton's personal profit at your expense.
But it gets even worse.
The FBI documents show that Under-Secretary of State Patrick Kennedy made the request for altering classification as part of a "quid pro quo."
This is felony corruption.
Under-Secretary Kennedy needs to resign.
Clinton cronies have sacrificed your security, your family's safety, and your country's safety as though it meant nothing at all.
This is magnitudes worse than Watergate.
And we're going to put an end to it on November 8th.
But there's still more.
Another series of emails shows top officials in the Clinton campaign scheming to take massive sums of money from foreign lobbyists.
One of the emails from a top Hillary official said, quote, "take the money!!"
with two exclamation points.
This is money bundled by people registered as lobbyists on behalf of foreign governments.
Remember, we are competing in a rigged election ... the media is trying to rig the election by giving credence to false stories that have no validity and making it front page news, only to poison the minds of the American voters.
The media is an extension of the Clinton Campaign, as WikiLeaks proved ... Hillary even got the questions and answers in advance of a major debate.
A new report from the Center for Public Integrity shows that 96% of so-called journalists and reporters who donated this cycle gave their money to Hillary Clinton.
They even want to try and rig the election at the polling booths, where so many cities are corrupt and voter fraud is all too common.
The following comes straight from Pew Research.
QUOTE: "Approximately 24 million...one of every eight...voter registrations in the United States are no longer valid or are significantly inaccurate."
QUOTE: "More than 1.8 million deceased individuals are listed as voters."
QUOTE: "Approximately 2.75 million people have registrations in more than one state."
Then there is the issue of illegal immigrants voting.
The following comes from a 2014 report from the Washington Post.
The article was entitled: "could non-citizens decide the November election?"
Here are some excerpts.
QUOTE: "More than 14 percent of non-citizens in both the 2008 and 2010 samples indicated that they were registered to vote."
QUOTE: "Because non-citizens tended to favor Democrats (Obama won more than 80 percent of the votes of non-citizens in the 2008 sample), we find that this participation was large enough to plausibly account for Democratic victories in a few close elections.
Non-citizen votes could have given Senate Democrats the pivotal 60th vote needed to overcome filibusters in order to pass health-care reform and other Obama administration priorities in the 111th Congress.
It is also possible that non-citizen votes were responsible for Obama's 2008 victory in North Carolina.
Obama won the state by 14,177 votes, so a turnout by 5.1 percent of North Carolina's adult non-citizens would have provided this victory margin."
Our system is also rigged by the donors, giving hundreds of millions to Hillary Clinton's campaign.
The reason Hillary Clinton pushes for NAFTA, or the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and for completely open borders, is because her international donors control her every move.
If we let the Clinton Cartel run this government, history will record that 2017 was the year America lost its independence.
We will not let that happen.
It is time to drain the swamp in Washington, D.C.
That is why I am proposing a package of ethics reforms to make our government honest once again.
When Bill Clinton came into office, he signed an executive order saying if you work for the White House or a federal agency, you can't lobby the government for 5 years after you leave.
But then, President Clinton did what the Clintons always do ... he rigged the system on his way out.
Clinton lifted the executive order so the Clintons and their cronies like John Podesta could start raking in cash.
So, here is what I am announcing tonight.
First: I am going to re-institute a 5-year ban on all executive branch officials lobbying the government for 5 years after they leave government service.
I am going to ask Congress to pass this ban into law so that it cannot be lifted by executive order.
Second: I am going to ask Congress to institute its own 5-year ban on lobbying by former members of Congress and their staffs.
Third: I am going to expand the definition of lobbyist so we close all the loopholes that former government officials use by labeling themselves consultants and advisors when we all know they are lobbyists.
Fourth: I am going to issue a lifetime ban against senior executive branch officials lobbying on behalf of a foreign government.
And Fifth: I am going to ask Congress to pass a campaign finance reform that prevents registered foreign lobbyists from raising money in American elections.
Not only will we end our government corruption, but we will end the economic stagnation.
My plan for the economy can be summed up in three simple words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
At the center of my plan will be fixing our terrible trade deals.
47 million Americans are in poverty and 45 million Americans are on Food Stamps.
We have nearly an $800 billion annual trade deficit in goods with the world, and the worst so-called recovery since the Great Depression.
It's the Clintons who gave us NAFTA, and the Clintons who gave us China's entry into the World Trade Organization.
Briggs &amp; Stratton has cut thousands of Wisconsin manufacturing jobs and moved them to China.
GE Healthcare recently closed its Milwaukee location and shipped the jobs to Mexico.
Johnson Controls shuttered its plants in Milwaukee and West Allis and moved the jobs to Mexico and China.
The list goes on and on.
We are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world.
A Trump Administration is going to renegotiate NAFTA, stand up to China, and stop the jobs from leaving our country.
As part of our plan to bring back our jobs, we are going to lower our business tax from 35 percent to 15 percent.
We will be a rich nation once again.
But to be a rich country, we must also be a safe country.
National Security begins at the border.
Speaking in secret to a foreign bank Hillary Clinton said her dream is for totally "open trade and open borders."
By "open trade," she means foreign countries can cheat us out of millions of jobs and trillions of dollars.
By "open borders," she means totally unlimited immigration.
In a secret speech to Goldman Sachs, she said citizens who want to control immigration are "Un-American."
So Hillary thinks most of the country is either deplorable, irredeemable, un-American, racist, or basement dwellers supporting Bernie Sanders.
Hillary's plan includes an open border with the Middle East ... meaning generations of radicalism and terrorism spreading and growing within our shores.
So let me state this as clearly as I can.
If I'm elected President I am going to keep Radical Islamic Terrorists out of our country.
We will also stop the crisis of illegal immigration.
A Trump Administration will secure and defend our borders.
And yes, we will build a wall.
We have the first-ever endorsement from our ICE and Border Patrol officers.
As Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton allowed thousands of criminal aliens to be released because their home countries wouldn't take them back.
The ICE officers described Hillary's proposal as, quote, the most radical immigration proposal in U.S.
history."
Here is a summary of the Hillary plan:
--Support for Sanctuary Cities
--Social Security, Medicare and lifetime welfare for illegal immigrants by making them all citizens
--Obamacare for illegal immigrants
--No deportation of visa overstays
--Expanding catch-and-release on the border
--Expanding President Obama's unconstitutional executive amnesty, including instant work permits for millions of illegal workers
--Freeing even more criminal aliens by expanding Obama's non-enforcement directives
--A 550% increase in Syrian refugees
Either we win this election, or we lose the country.
Under a Trump Administration, it's going to be America First.
Here are some of the amazing things we are going to do for our country starting in 2017:
We are going to have the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; defend religious liberty; provide school choice to every low-income child in America; rebuild our depleted military and take care of our vets; support the men and women of law enforcement; repeal and replace Obamacare; save the 2nd amendment; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
You have 22 days to make every dream you ever dreamed of for your country come true.
On November 8th, the arrogance of Washington D.C. will come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter.
I am going to fight for every citizen, of every background, from every stretch of this nation.
I'm going to fight for every child living in poverty.
I'm going to fight for every mom who lost her child to illegal immigration, and drugs and gang violence.
I'm going to fight for every community whose jobs and dreams have been ripped out and shipped to other countries.
I'm going to fight for every person in this country who believes government should serve the people ... not the donors.
And I am going to fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
You're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life.
You're going to remember this day.
This is a movement like you've never seen before.
You're going to look back at this election, and say this is by far the most important vote you've ever cast for anyone at any time.
Once again, we are going to have a government of, by and for the people.
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
In 19 days, we are going to win the state of Ohio and we are going to win the White House.
Early voting is underway, so make sure to mail in your ballot or vote in-person.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I want to make a major announcement today.
I would like to promise and pledge to all of my voters and supporters, and to all of the people of the United States, that I will totally accept the results of this great and historic Presidential election ... if I win!
ALTERNATE:
Ladies and Gentlemen, I want to make a major announcement today.
I would like to promise and pledge to all of my voters and supporters, and to all of the people of the United States, that when the results come in on election night, I will accept ... without delay or hesitation ... the concession speech of Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Now, seriously, the debate last night was amazing and everybody said I won, including every single online poll, some by 90-10.
The question of voter fraud came up during the debate.
We want fairness in the election, having nothing to do with me and having to do with the future of the country.
John Podesta, Hillary's Campaign Chairman, was quoted in WikiLeaks, as saying illegal immigrants could vote as long as they have Drivers' Licenses.
One of the big issues that came up last night was the fact that the Clinton Campaign has paid people to disrupt our rallies and incite violence.
This is criminal behavior that violates centuries of tradition on peaceful, Democratic elections.
A campaign like Clinton's that will incite violence is truly a campaign that will do anything.
And a candidate, like Hillary Clinton, who will lie to the Congress and the FBI, destroy 33,000 emails, put her office up for sale, and put our confidential information in reach of our enemies ... is a candidate who is truly capable of anything.
In addition, it was just learned, Hillary was given the exact debate questions, word for word, by Donna Brazile ... who is now under tremendous pressure to resign.
But I ask you, why shouldn't Hillary Clinton resign from the race ... she was given the questions, used the questions, and never said that she did something that was totally inappropriate?
Years ago there was a show called the $64,000 question ... he got the questions in advance, his life was ruined.
This is even bigger, because we are playing for the presidency of the United States.
Hillary Clinton is the most corrupt person ever to seek the office of the Presidency.
So it's in that context I was asked a question about whether I would agree, in advance, to concede the results on election night.
This is an unprecedented question.
If Al Gore or George Bush had agreed 3 weeks before the election to concede the results and waive their right to a legal challenge or a recount, then there would be no Supreme Court case and no Bush V. Gore.
In effect, I'm being asked to waive centuries of legal precedent designed to protect the franchise of voters.
According to Pew, there are 24 million voter registrations in the United States that are either invalid or significantly inaccurate.
1.8 million dead people are registered to vote (some of whom vote even though they are dead ... which is a hard thing to do, but easy if fraud is involved).
2.8 million people are registered in more than one state.
And 14% of non-citizens are registered to vote.
So what I'm saying is, we have to be vigilant and we have to be careful.
America is a Constitutional Republic with a system of laws.
These laws are triggered in the case of fraud, or in the event a recount is needed.
Of course I would accept a clear election result, but I would also reserve my right to contest or file a legal challenge in the case of a questionable result.
I will follow and abide by all of the rules and traditions of all the candidates who came before me.
But, none of this will matter, since we are going to win big on November 8th.
Together, we are going to deliver real change that puts America First.
We are going to renegotiate our terrible trade deals, end illegal immigration, stop the massive inflow of refugees, reduce surging crime, cut taxes and regulations, unleash job-producing American energy, rebuild our military and take care of our Vets, and repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare.
Your jobs will come back under a Trump Administration.
Your incomes will go up under a Trump Administration.
Your taxes will go way down under a Trump Administration.
Your companies won't be leaving Ohio under a Trump Administration.
Right now, our economy isn't growing at all.
I'm going to get us to 4% growth and create 25 million jobs over 10 years.
Many workers are earning less today than they were 18 years ago, they are working harder and longer, but making less.
Some of them are working two, three jobs but still taking home less money.
Companies, like Carrier are firing their workers and moving to Mexico.
Ford is moving all of its small car production to Mexico.
When I'm President, if companies want to fire their workers and leave for Mexico, then we will charge them a 35% tax when they want to ship their products back in.
That means the companies won't leave in the first place and, if they do, we'll at least make money when they ship their products across the border.
Right now, our politicians don't do anything to keep our companies from leaving because they are controlled by lobbyists and special interests ... Hillary Clinton has raised countless millions of dollars from big donors who want to ship our jobs to other countries.
That is why I am proposing a package of ethics reforms to make our government honest once again.
It's time to drain the swamp of corruption in Washington, D.C.
Those reforms include the following:
A 5 year-ban on executive branch and congressional officials lobbying the government after they leave government service.
A lifetime ban on former executive branch officials lobbying on behalf of a foreign government.
A ban on foreign lobbyists raising money for American elections.
Additionally, I am going to push for a constitutional amendment to impose term limits on all members of Congress.
It's about time.
Not only will we end our government corruption, but we will end the economic stagnation.
My plan for the economy can be summed up in three simple words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
At the center of my historic jobs plan will be fixing our terrible trade deals.
47 million Americans are in poverty and 45 million Americans are on Food Stamps.
We have nearly an $800 billion annual trade deficit in goods with the world, and the worst so-called recovery since the Great Depression.
Ohio has lost 1 in 4 manufacturing jobs since NAFTA and China's entrance into the World Trade Organization ... two Bill and Hillary-backed disasters.
We are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world.
A Trump Administration is going to renegotiate NAFTA, stand up to foreign cheating, and stop the jobs from leaving our country.
I also have another major announcement I am going to make today that concerns manufacturing in the United States, and how we are going to bring jobs back to Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, and all across this great nation.
American trade policy is currently mismanaged by dozens of competing bureaucracies spread across the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Labor, State and Treasury Department and the U.S. Trade Representative.
In my administration, all trade policymaking will be consolidated in one Office.
It will report to an American Desk and it will be located inside the Department of Commerce.
The mission of the American Desk will be to protect the economic interests of the American worker, and the national interests of the United States.
It's going to be America First.
As part of our plan to bring back our jobs, we are going to lower our business tax from 35 percent to 15 percent.
We are also going to rebuild our inner cities.
African-Americans and Hispanics living in the inner cities are suffering.
The violence is unbearable.
You walk to the store with your child and you get shot.
There is no education, there are no jobs, there is no safety.
Nearly 3,500 people have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year.
Homicides are up nearly 50% in Washington, D.C. and more than 60% in Baltimore.
And it's getting worse.
To the African-American and Hispanic voters suffering, I say: what do you have to lose?
Vote for Donald Trump.
I will fix it.
We will be a rich nation once again.
But to be a rich country, we must also be a safe country.
National Security begins at the border.
Speaking in secret to a foreign bank Hillary Clinton said her dream is for totally "open trade and open borders."
Hillary's plan includes an open border with the Middle East ... meaning generations of radicalism and terrorism spreading and growing within our shores.
Just last week, an Iraqi refugee approved for entry by Hillary Clinton's State Department pled guilty to joining ISIS.
So let me state this as clearly as I can.
If I'm elected President I am going to keep Radical Islamic Terrorists out of our country.
We will also stop the crisis of illegal immigration.
A Trump Administration will secure and defend our borders.
And yes, we will build a wall.
We have the first-ever endorsement from our ICE and Border Patrol officers.
There is another major policy announcement I would like to make today.
Every year, countless American lives are lost to Sanctuary Cities.
My opponent strongly supports Sanctuary Cities, like the ones that got Kate Steinle killed by a five-time deported criminal illegal immigrant.
If I am elected President, I am going to cut off federal funding to Sanctuary Cities that refuse to cooperate with federal immigration authorities.
We are going to save American lives.
Either we win this election, or we lose the country.
Here are some of the amazing things we are going to do for our country starting in 2017:
We are going to have the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan; eliminate every unnecessary job-killing regulation; defend religious liberty; provide school choice to every low-income child in America, and we are going to end common core; support the men and women of law enforcement; save the 2nd amendment; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
You have 19 days to make every dream you ever dreamed of for your country come true.
Our campaign is powered by our love for this country and our love for our fellow citizens.
It's a campaign about rejecting the cynicism and elitism of our failed political establishment.
I am going to fight for every citizen, of every background, from every stretch of this nation.
I'm going to fight for every child living in poverty.
I'm going to fight for every mom whose lost her child to illegal immigration, and drugs and gang violence.
I'm going to fight for every community whose jobs and factories have been ripped out of states like Ohio and shipped to other countries.
I'm going to fight for every person in this country who believes government should serve the people ... not the donors and special interests.
And I am going to fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
You're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life.
You're going to remember this day.
This is a movement like you've never seen before.
You're going to look back at this election, and say this is by far the most important vote you've ever cast for anyone at any time.
Because if we win ...
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
In 18 days, we are going to win the state of North Carolina and we are going to win the White House.
Our opponents have spent more money than ever before in the history of campaigns -- raised from special interests -- and yet we are leading in the polls from Rasmussen, LA Times, and Investor's Business Daily.
Early voting is underway, so make sure to send in your ballot.
Together, we are going to deliver real change that puts America First.
We are going to renegotiate our terrible trade deals, end illegal immigration, stop the massive inflow of refugees, reduce surging crime, cut taxes and regulations, unleash job-producing American energy, rebuild our military and take care of our Vets, and repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare.
Your jobs will come back under a Trump Administration.
Your incomes will go up under a Trump Administration.
Your taxes will go way down under a Trump Administration.
Your companies won't be leaving North Carolina under a Trump Administration.
We will be a strong nation again.
American Leadership has grown so weak, that the Philippines have broken with decades of pro-American foreign policy to instead leave for the orbit of China and Russia.
Strength will also require growth.
Right now, our economy isn't growing at all.
We had only around 1% growth in the last quarter.
I'm going to get us to 4% growth and create 25 million jobs over 10 years.
Many workers are earning less today than they were 18 years ago, they are working harder and longer, but making less.
Some of them are working two, three jobs but still taking home less money.
Companies, like Carrier are firing their workers and moving to Mexico.
Ford is moving all of its small car production to Mexico.
When I'm President, if companies want to fire their workers and leave for Mexico, then we will charge them a 35% tax when they want to ship their products back into the United States.
That means the companies won't leave in the first place and, if they do, we'll at least make money when they ship their products across the border.
Hillary Clinton has raised countless millions of dollars from big donors who want to ship our jobs to other countries ... including millions of dollars from corporations and countries pushing the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
That's how our system is corrupt and broken.
We're going to take on big donors, big business and big media that have enriched themselves at your expense.
The media is so corrupt that Hillary was given the exact questions to a previous debate, word for word, by Donna Brazile ... who is now under tremendous pressure to resign.
Hillary was given the questions, used the questions, and never said that she did something that was totally inappropriate.
Years ago there was a show called the $64,000 question ... a contestant got the questions in advance, his life was ruined.
This is even bigger, because we are playing for the presidency of the United States.
Hillary Clinton is the most corrupt person ever to seek the office of the Presidency.
Now, from WikiLeaks, we've just learned she tried to get $12 million from the King of Morocco for an appearance ... more pay-for-play.
That is why I am proposing a package of ethics reforms to make our government honest once again.
It's time to drain the swamp in Washington, D.C.
Those reforms include the following:
A 5 year-ban on White House and Congressional officials becoming lobbyists after they leave government service.
A lifetime ban on White House officials lobbying on behalf of a foreign government.
A complete ban on foreign lobbyists raising money for American elections.
Additionally, I am going to push for a constitutional amendment to impose term limits on all members of Congress.
Not only will we end government corruption, but we will end economic stagnation.
My plan for the economy can be summed up in three simple words: Jobs, Jobs, Jobs
At the center of my historic jobs plan will be fixing our terrible trade deals.
47 million Americans are in poverty and 45 million Americans are on Food Stamps.
We have nearly an $800 billion dollar annual trade deficit in goods with the world, and the worst so-called recovery since the Great Depression.
North Carolina has lost nearly half of its manufacturing jobs since NAFTA, a deal signed by Bill Clinton and supported by Hillary Clinton.
We've lost 70,000 factories since China's entry into the World Trade Organization ... another Bill and Hillary-backed deal.
We are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world.
A Trump Administration is going to renegotiate NAFTA, stand up to foreign cheating, and stop the jobs from leaving our country.
We are going to start making things in America again ... and we are going to start making things in North Carolina again.
In order to bring manufacturing back to North Carolina, Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and so many other places, we are going to undertake a major reform of our federal bureaucracy.
American trade policy is currently mismanaged by dozens of competing bureaucracies spread across the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Labor, State and Treasury Department and the U.S. Trade Representative.
In my administration, all trade policymaking will be consolidated into one Office.
It will report to what we call the American Desk.
The mission of the American Desk will be to protect the economic interests of the American worker, and the national interests of the United States.
It's going to be America First.
As part of our plan to bring back our jobs, we are going to lower our business tax from 35 percent to 15 percent.
We are also going to rebuild our inner cities.
African- Americans and Hispanics living in the inner cities are suffering.
The violence is unbearable.
You walk to the store with your child and you get shot.
There is no education, there are no jobs, there is no safety.
Nearly 3,500 people have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year.
Homicides are up nearly 50% in Washington, D.C. and more than 60% in Baltimore.
And it's getting worse.
To the African-American and Hispanic voters suffering, I say: what do you have to lose?
Vote for Donald Trump.
I will fix it.
We will be a rich nation once again.
But to be a rich country, we must also be a safe country.
National Security begins at the border.
Speaking in secret to a foreign bank Hillary Clinton said her dream is for totally "open trade and open borders."
Hillary's plan includes an open border with the Middle East ... meaning generations of radicalism and terrorism spreading and growing within our shores.
So let me state this as clearly as I can.
If I'm elected President I am going to keep Radical Islamic Terrorists out of our country.
We will also stop the crisis of illegal immigration.
A Trump Administration will secure and defend our borders.
And yes, we will build a wall.
We have the first-ever endorsement from our ICE and Border Patrol officers.
As Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton allowed thousands of criminal aliens to be released because their home countries wouldn't take them back.
It was just reported that a man deported from our country 10 times in six years has been charged with raping a 12-year old girl.
In August, Texas Police arrested a serial illegal immigrant rapist who had been deported five times, his victims included one 68 year-old woman with a cane who took his offer to drive her home.
He left her on the side of a dirt road.
A 64 year-old Air Force Veteran, Marilyn Pharis, was raped and beaten to death with a hammer by a repeat-offending criminal illegal immigrant who should have been deported ... but never was.
What kind of government allows its citizens to suffer such horrors?
Either we win this election, or we lose the country.
A victory in November will be a victory for you, the American people.
Here are some of the amazing things we are going to do for our country starting in 2017:
We are going to have the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan; eliminate every unnecessary job-killing regulation; defend religious liberty; provide school choice to every low-income child in America, and we are going to end Common Core; support the men and women of law enforcement; save the 2nd amendment; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
You have 18 days to make every dream you ever dreamed of for your country come true.
Our campaign is powered by our love for this country and our love for our fellow citizens.
It's a campaign about rejecting the cynicism and elitism of our failed political establishment.
I am going to fight for every citizen, of every background, from every stretch of this nation.
I'm going to fight for every child living in poverty.
I'm going to fight for every mom who lost her child to illegal immigration, and drugs and gang violence.
I'm going to fight for every community whose jobs and factories have been ripped out of states like North Carolina and shipped to other countries.
I'm going to fight for every person in this country who believes government should serve the people ... not the donors and special interests.
And I am going to fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
You're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life.
You're going to remember this day.
This is a movement like you've never seen before.
You're going to look back at this election, and say this is by far the most
important vote you've ever cast for anyone at any time.
Because if we win ...
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
In 18 days, we are going to win the state of Pennsylvania and we are going to win the White House.
But you have to vote on November 8th.
Our opponents have spent more money than ever before in the history of campaigns ... raised from special interests ... and yet we are leading in the polls from Rasmussen, LA Times, and Investor's Business Daily.
Together, we are going to deliver real change that puts America First.
We are going to renegotiate our terrible trade deals, end illegal immigration, stop the massive inflow of refugees, reduce surging crime, cut taxes and regulations, end Common Core, and repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare.
Your jobs will come back under a Trump Administration.
Your incomes will go up under a Trump Administration.
Your taxes will go way down under a Trump Administration.
Your companies won't be leaving Pennsylvania under a Trump Administration.
We are also going to rebuild our badly depleted military.
Our Navy is the smallest it's been since World War I.
My plan will build the 350 ship Navy we need.
This will be the largest effort at rebuilding our military since Ronald Reagan, and it will require a truly national effort.
The Philadelphia Navy Yard is a perfect example.
I will instruct my Secretary of the Navy to study locations like Philadelphia with a long history of service to our military and proximity to vibrant private industry and find ways to involve them in this national effort.
As our fleet is rebuilt, we'll need to invest in recruiting the skilled American craftsmen we need, like welders and pipe fitters and so much more.
We will establish 'centers of excellence' in places like Philadelphia and Portsmouth New Hampshire and Hampton Roads in Virginia to produce the master craftsmen we need to rebuild our Fleet.
We will rebuild our navy and we will do it with American steel made right here in Pennsylvania.
As part of our plan for bold change to make your life better, we will also rebuild our massively depleted infrastructure.
Obama-Clinton doubled the national debt in 8 years ... but instead of rebuilding America, the money was all lost and America's infrastructure is like that of a third-world country.
We're also spending $6 trillion dollars in the Middle East, with nothing to show for it.
Imagine if we had spent this money rebuilding the inner cities of Philadelphia.
Instead, we spent trillions on foreign countries and left our own to crumble.
We defend other countries' borders, invest in their resources, but abandon our own.
The plan I am proposing targets substantial new investment here at home to fix America's transportation, drinking water, and other vital infrastructure.
This can be achieved through a focus on public-private partnerships, proven financing programs, and tax credits that incentivize companies to make major job-and-wealth producing investments in the local economy.
This means help for projects like the Pennsylvania Turnpike as well as the Pennsylvania portion of the Appalachian Highway System.
My plan will also help Pennsylvania upgrade or replace bridges in the Commonwealth that have been deemed "structurally deficient."
We are also going to unleash the power of American energy right here in Pennsylvania ... shale, oil, natural gas and clean coal.
We are putting Pennsylvania back to work, and we are putting the special interests out of work.
We are going to renegotiate NAFTA, stop the TPP, and stand up to foreign product dumping and currency manipulation.
Your city has lost one-third of its manufacturing jobs since Bill Clinton signed NAFTA ... a deal supported by Hillary Clinton.
70,000 factories have shut down or left the United States since China entered the World Trade Organization.
Just a few miles from here, there's a very famous bridge that says: "Trenton Makes, The World Takes."
Under a Trump Administration, I can promise you: we are going to start making things in America again ... and we are going to start making things in Pennsylvania again.
Your products will be sent around the world, not your jobs.
Hillary is controlled by special interests who want to ship your jobs to other countries.
She's the most corrupt person ever to run for President.
She bleached and deleted 33,000 emails ... after a Congressional subpoena ... lied under oath to Congress, lied to the FBI, obstructed justice, made 13 phones disappear ... some with a hammer ... and now we learn 2 boxes of evidence have mysteriously gone missing.
Now, from WikiLeaks, we've just learned she tried to get $12 million dollars from the King of Morocco for an appearance ... more pay-for-play.
That is why I am proposing a package of ethics reforms to make our government honest once again.
It's time to drain the swamp in Washington, D.C.
One new proposal I am outlining today will help us put the corrupt regulation industry out of business.
I will work with Congress to require that for every 1 new regulation, 2 old regulations must be eliminated.
We're losing $2 trillion dollars in economic activity a year to regulations ... the only people getting rich are the lobbyists, lawyers and special interests.
I am also going to push for a constitutional amendment to impose term limits on all members of Congress.
Not only will we end government corruption, but we will end economic stagnation.
My plan lowers our business tax from 35 percent to 15 percent.
We are also going to rebuild our inner cities.
African-Americans and Hispanics living in the inner cities are suffering.
The violence is unbearable.
You walk to the store with your child and you get shot.
There is no education, there are no jobs, there is no safety.
Nearly 3,500 people have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year.
Homicides are up nearly 50% in Washington, D.C. and more than 60% in Baltimore.
And it's getting worse.
To the African-American and Hispanic voters suffering, I say: what do you have to lose?
Vote for Donald Trump.
I will fix it.
We will take care of our inner cities, and we will bring safety, prosperity and security to the people of Philadelphia.
We will be a rich nation once again.
But to be a rich country, we must also be a safe country.
National security begins at the border.
Speaking in secret to a foreign bank Hillary Clinton said her dream is for totally "open trade and open borders."
Hillary's plan includes an open border with the Middle East ... meaning generations of radicalism and terrorism spreading and growing within our shores.
She even wants a 550% increase in Syrian refugees.
So let me state this as clearly as I can.
If I'm elected President I am going to keep Radical Islamic Terrorists out of our country.
We will also stop the crisis of illegal immigration.
A Trump Administration will secure and defend our borders.
And yes, we will build a wall.
We have the first-ever endorsement from our ICE and Border Patrol officers.
It was just reported that a man deported from our country 10 times in six years has been charged with raping a 12-year old girl.
In August, Texas Police arrested a serial illegal immigrant rapist who had been deported five times, one victim included a 68 year-old woman with a cane who took his offer to drive her home.
He left her on the side of a dirt road.
A 64 year-old Air Force Veteran, Marilyn Pharis, was raped and beaten to death with a hammer by a repeat-offending criminal illegal immigrant who should have been deported ... but never was.
If I'm elected, we will impose tough new mandatory minimum federal prison sentences for anyone who illegally re-enters the country after previously being deported.
And we will swiftly remove and deport all criminal aliens from this country, and dismantle the gangs and cartels preying on our citizens.
Either we win this election, or we lose the country.
A victory in November will be a victory for you, the American people.
Here are some of the amazing things we are going to do for our country starting in 2017:
We are going to have the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan; eliminate every unnecessary job-killing regulation; defend religious liberty; provide school choice to every low-income child in America, and we are going to end Common Core; support the men and women of law enforcement; save the 2nd amendment; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
For the next 18 days, you have to get every last person you know out to the voting booths.
This is our one magnificent chance to reclaim our country for We The People.
I am going to fight for every citizen, of every background, from every stretch of this nation.
I'm going to fight for every child living in poverty.
I'm going to fight for every mom who lost her child to illegal immigration, and drugs and gang violence.
I'm going to fight for every community whose jobs and factories have been ripped out of states like Pennsylvania and shipped to other countries.
I'm going to fight for every person in this country who believes government should serve the people ... not the donors and special interests.
And I am going to fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
You're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life.
You're going to remember this day.
This is a movement like you've never seen before.
You're going to look back at this election, and say this is by far the most important vote you've ever cast for anyone at any time.
If we win, the change you've been waiting for will finally arrive.
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
It's great to be back here in beautiful Naples.
In 16 days, we are going to win the great state of Florida and we are going to win the White House.
Early voting begins tomorrow, and you can already get your absentee ballot, so make sure to start voting.
Yesterday, I outlined my Contract with the American Voter ... a detailed list of solutions to bring prosperity to our economy, safety to our communities, and honesty to our government.
One of the issues I addressed at length is the issue of government corruption.
I put forward a plan to stop it; my opponent has no plan to end government corruption because she is the embodiment of government corruption.
Even as she was preparing to run for President, WikiLeaks emails show, Hillary was trying to get $12 million from the King of Morocco in yet one more Pay-For-Play scheme.
My goal is to keep foreign money out of American politics.
Hillary Clinton's goal is to put the Oval Office up for sale to whatever country offers the highest price.
So I have a message today to the voters of America.
It's a message for Republicans, Democrats and Independents.
It's a message for those living in rural America, urban America and suburban America ... because we are all just One America.
It's a message for everyone who wants to take back our government from the special interests.
And my message is this: if we win on November 8th, we are going to fix our rigged system and we are going to Drain The Swamp Of Corruption In Washington, D.C.
That change includes a new foreign policy that puts America First.
Hillary Clinton's foreign policy has squandered trillions in American wealth overseas.
Yet, for all the money spent, all Clinton delivered was death, destruction and terrorism.
She unleashed ISIS and turmoil in Iraq, Syria and Libya.
Next, trigger-happy Hillary wants to start a shooting war in Syria that could involve nuclear-armed Russia ... she has bad judgment, bad instincts, and is just too reckless to be allowed into the Oval Office.
Hillary also started the negotiations that led to the Iran deal ... and thus ultimately leading to the $1.7 billion ransom for American hostages.
Clinton gave Iran everything they wanted and more ... including Iraq.
Now, Iran is emboldened as never before.
In the latest insult to America, the government of Iran is demanding "many billions," in new ransom payments for an American businessman and his ailing father.
Adding to the insult, Iran has released a video of their captive that includes footage from earlier this year of American soldiers being forced to their knees at gunpoint.
The humiliation for our country never seems to end ... and it's the humiliation brought on by a Secretary of State who was more interested in getting paid by foreign countries, than in representing the country she lives in.
To cover-up her crimes as Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton bleached and deleted 33,000 emails, lied to Congress under oath, made 13 phones disappear ... some with a hammer ... and then told the FBI she couldn't remember 39 times.
The best evidence that the system is rigged is that Hillary Clinton is even allowed to run for President in the first place.
The Clintons grew their gross income by $60 million while Hillary was Secretary of State.
She's not a diplomat ... she's a grifter, always looking for an easy way to sell government favors and access in exchange for cash.
The Clintons end up with the money, and America ends up with the humiliation.
When I am President, America will be respected in the world once again.
That also means standing up against the oppression of the Castro regime in Cuba, and standing in solidarity with freedom-loving people in Venezuela and across Latin America living under oppression.
The Obama-Clinton Administration has abandoned our friends in Latin America, and delivered only poverty and joblessness for Hispanic-Americans here at home.
If you elect me, along with a Republican House and Senate, we will also immediately repeal the Obama-Clinton defense sequester and rebuild our badly depleted military.
It's part of my 100-day plan.
This will be a national effort that will involve everywhere from Key West to Tampa to the Space Coast to Jacksonville to the Panhandle.
My proposal is based on three crucial words: Peace Through Strength.
This defense build-up will be supported by ships in Mayport, and by engineers and advanced manufacturing on the Space Coast.
New aircraft will fly from MacDill Air Force Base and Naval Air Station Pensacola.
New Navy and Coast Guard ships will patrol the Florida coast to prevent drugs and terrorists from entering our shores.
With a Republican House and Senate, we will also immediately repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare.
Even Bill Clinton admitted Obamacare is "the craziest thing in the world," where "people wind up with their premiums doubled and their coverage cut in half."
Replacing Obamacare is part of my 100-day contract with the American Voter.
A Republican House and Senate can swiftly enact the other items in my contract immediately, including massive tax reduction and tax simplification for the middle class.
My plan to transform our tax, regulatory, energy and trade policies is the most pro-growth plan in American history.
It includes lowering our business tax from 35 to 15 percent.
My reform plan will lift millions out of poverty, raise wages dramatically, and create at least 25 million new jobs in 10 years ... and we can enact the whole plan in our first 100 days.
A Trump Administration will also work alongside you to restore and protect the beautiful Florida Everglades.
Our plan will also help you upgrade water and wastewater systems so that the Florida Aquifer is pure and safe from pollution.
We will also repair the Herbert Hoover Dike in Lake Okeechobee.
My contract includes something else at the very center of this campaign: fixing our trade deals and ending the offshoring of American jobs.
One more way our system is rigged against the American Worker is that companies, like Carrier, simply fire their workers and move their operations to Mexico and other countries. 
When I'm President, if companies want to fire their workers and leave for other countries, then we will charge them a 35% tax when they want to ship their products back into the United States.
We have a nearly $800 billion-dollar annual trade deficit in goods with the world.
1 in 5 American households don't have a single person in that household with a job.
Florida has lost 1 in 4 of its manufacturing jobs since NAFTA, a deal signed by Bill Clinton and supported by Hillary Clinton.
We've lost 70,000 factories since China's entry into the World Trade Organization ... another Bill and Hillary-backed deal.
We are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world.
A Trump Administration will stop the jobs from leaving our country.
We will start making things in America.
We will be a rich nation once again.
But to be a rich country, we must also be a safe country.
Immigration security is national security.
Hillary's pledge for "open borders" includes an open border with the Middle East ... meaning generations of radicalism and terrorism spreading and growing within your communities and near your families.
A new WikiLeaks email shows John Podesta secretly worried about the fact that Hillary Clinton never put procedures in place to keep the San Bernardino shooter out of America ... including a plan to review social media postings.
We're letting in Radical Islamic Terrorists right through the front door, and stamping their visas "approved" on the way in.
So let me state this as clearly as I can. 
If I'm elected President I am going to keep Radical Islamic Terrorists out of our country.
We will also stop the crisis of illegal immigration.
A Trump Administration will secure and defend our borders.
And yes, we will build a wall.
We have the first-ever endorsement from our ICE and Border Patrol officers.
All across our nation, innocent Americans have been killed by illegal immigrant criminals who should never have been in our country.
Kate Steinle was gunned down in her father's arms in broad daylight on a San Francisco pier.
Her killer had been deported 5 times before.
90 year-old Earl Olander was brutally beaten to death in his home by illegal immigrants with criminal records and left on the floor of his home to die.
Laura Wilkerson's teenage son, Josh, was tortured and beaten to do by an illegal immigrant he offered to give a ride home.
His body was viciously burned.
The examples go on and on and on.
Under a Trump Administration, this crime wave will come crashing to an end.
That includes the proposal, in my contract, for tough mandatory minimum prison sentences for illegal immigrants who re-enter the country after a previous deportation.
With a victory in November, everything will change.
Here are some of the amazing things we are going to do for our country starting in 2017:
the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan; eliminate every unnecessary job-killing regulation; defend religious liberty; provide school choice to every disadvantaged child in America, and we are going to end Common Core; support the men and women of law enforcement; save the 2nd amendment; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
You have 16 days to make this all happen ... but you have to get out and vote, and that includes helping me elect a Republican Congress to enact my 100-day America-First action plan.
Our failed establishment will be replaced with a new government guided by the principles I outlined in my contract with the American Voter.
It will be a government of, by and for the people.
For those who feel like they don't have a voice, I have a simple reply: I Am Your Voice.
I'm going to fight for every American in every last part of this nation.
I'm going to fight for every person in this country who believes government should serve the people ... not the donors and special interests.
And I am going to fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag. 
You're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life. 
This is a movement like the world has never seen before.
You're going to look back at this election, and say this is by far the most 
important vote you've ever cast for anyone at any time. 
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
That is the issue of urban renewal, and the rebuilding of our inner cities.
Today I want to talk about how to grow the African-American middle class, and to provide a new deal for Black America.
That deal is grounded in three promises: safe communities, great education, and high-paying jobs.
My vision rests on a principle that has defined this campaign: America First.
Every African-American citizen in this country is entitled to a government that puts their jobs, wages and security first.
I'm asking today for the honor of your vote, and the privilege to represent you as your President.
Here is the promise I make to you: whether you vote for me or not, I will be your greatest champion.
I have no special interest, I take no orders from donors or lobbyists ...
I work for you, and only you.
Our campaign is about change, optimism, and the future.
I am asking people to break from the bitter failures of the past, and to imagine the amazing possibilities for our future.
Our opponent represents the rigged system and failed thinking of yesterday.
Her campaign offers only the depressing pessimism that says this is as good as it gets, that nothing can ever really change.
Hillary has been there for 30 years and hasn't fixed anything ... she's just made it worse.
American politics is caught in a time loop ... we keep electing the same people, who keep making the same mistakes, and who keep offering the same excuses.
The fact that our corrupt Washington establishment has tried so hard to stop our movement is just more proof that we represent the kind of change that arrives only once in a lifetime.
Every day I'm out on the trail proposing fresh solutions and new thinking.
And every day, the same people, getting rich off our broken system, tell us that we can't change and that we can't try anything new.
I have a message for all the doubters in Washington: America's future belongs to the dreamers, not the cynics.
And it's time to extend that dream to every African-American citizen in this country.
African-American citizens have sacrificed so much for this nation.
They have fought and died in every war since the Revolution, and from the pews and the picket lines they have lifted up the conscience of our country in the long march for Civil Rights.
Yet, too many African-Americans have been left behind.
45% of African-American children under the age of 6 live in poverty.
58% of African-American youth are not currently employed.
African-Americans compromise roughly 13 percent of the population, yet make-up 60% of murder victims under the age of 22.
In 2015, violent crime in Charlotte increased by 18 percent ... and it's expected to rise 24% in 2016.
In the city of Chicago, nearly 3,500 people have been shot since January of this year.
The conditions in our inner cities today are unacceptable.
The Democrats have run our inner cities for fifty, sixty, seventy years or more.
They've run the school boards, the city councils, the mayor's offices, and the congressional seats.
Their policies have failed, and they've failed miserably.
They've trapped children in failing government schools, and opposed school choice at every turn.
The Clintons gave us NAFTA and China's entry into the World Trade Organization, two deals that de-industrialized America, uprooted our industry, and stripped bare towns like Detroit and Baltimore and the inner cities of North Carolina.
This state has lost nearly half of its manufacturing jobs since Bill and Hillary's NAFTA, decimating the African-American middle class.
Democratic policies have also given rise to crippling crime and violence.
Then there is the issue of taxation and regulation.
Massive taxes, massive regulation of small business, and radical restrictions on American energy, have driven jobs and opportunities out of our inner cities.
Hillary wants to raise taxes on successful small businesses as high as 45 percent ... which will only drive more jobs out of your community, and into other countries.
One of the greatest betrayals has been the issue of immigration.
Illegal immigration violates the civil rights of African-Americans.
No group has been more economically-harmed by decades of illegal immigration than low-income African-American workers.
Hillary's pledge to enact "open borders," ... made in secret to a foreign bank ... would destroy the African-American middle class.
At the center of my revitalization plan is the issue of trade.
Massive, chronic trade deficits have emptied out our jobs.
Just look at what has happened to Baltimore, Detroit, Pittsburgh, Cleveland, and right here in North Carolina.
It's the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world.
If I'm President, and the executives at Ford Motor Company announce they are moving their plants and jobs to Mexico, I will pick up the phone and make a simple call.
I will tell those executives that if they move their factories to Mexico, I will put a 35% tax on their product before they ship it back into the United States.
We won't let your jobs be stolen from you anymore.
When we stop the offshoring to low-wage countries, we raise wages at home ... meaning rent and bills become instantly more affordable.
At the same time, my plan to lower the business tax from 35 percent to 15 percent will bring thousands of new companies onto our shores.
It also includes a massive middle class tax cut, tax-free childcare savings accounts, and childcare tax deductions and credits.
I will also propose tax holidays for inner-city investment, and new tax incentives to get foreign companies to relocate in blighted American neighborhoods.
I will further empower cities and states to seek a federal disaster designation for blighted communities in order to initiate the rebuilding of vital infrastructure, the demolition of abandoned properties, and the increased presence of law enforcement.
I will also pursue financial reforms to make it easier for young African-Americans to get credit to pursue their dreams in business and create jobs in their communities.
Dodd-Frank has been a disaster, making it harder for small businesses to get the credit they need.
The policies of the Clintons brought us the financial recession ... through lifting Glass-Steagall, pushing subprime lending, and blocking reforms to Fannie and Freddie.
It's time for a 21st century Glass Steagall and, as part of that, a priority on helping African-American businesses get the credit they need.
We will also encourage small-business creation by allowing social welfare workers to convert poverty assistance into repayable but forgive-able micro-loans.
Then there is the issue of public safety.
Making our communities safe again will be a priority for the Trump Administration.
I have heard and have listened to the concerns raised by African-American citizens about our justice system, and I promise that under a Trump Administration the law will be applied fairly, equally and without prejudice.
There will be only one set of rules ... not a two-tiered system of justice.
The best evidence of unequal justice is that Hillary Clinton could violate so many laws, bleach and delete 33,000 emails after a Congressional subpoena, lie to Congress and the FBI ... put our national security at grave risk ... and not even face so much as a fine.
Equal justice also means the same rules for Wall Street.
The Obama Administration never held Wall Street accountable.
We will also police our streets.
I want every poor African-American child to be able to walk down the street in peace.
Safety is a civil right.
The problem is not the presence of police but the absence of police.
I will invest in training and funding both local and federal law enforcement operations to remove the gang members, drug dealers, and criminal cartels from our neighborhoods.
The reduction of crime is not merely a goal ... but a necessity.
We will get it done.
The war on police urged on by my rival is reckless, and dangerous, and puts African-American lives at risk.
We must work with our police, not against them.
On immigration, my policy is simple.
I will restore the civil rights of African-Americans, Hispanic-Americans, and all Americans, by ending illegal immigration.
I will reform visa rules to give American workers preference for jobs, and I will suspend reckless refugee admissions from terror-prone regions that cost taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars.
A portion of the money saved by enforcing our laws, and suspending refugees, will be re-invested in our inner cities.
It is time to help the American citizens who have become refugees in their own country.
Infrastructure will be another major goal.
My contract calls for $1 trillion dollars in infrastructure investment, of which the inner cities will be a major beneficiary.
I will also cancel all wasteful climate change spending from Obama-Clinton, including all global warming payments to the United Nations.
These steps will save $100 billion over 8 years, and this money will be used to help rebuild the vital infrastructure, including water systems, in America's inner cities.
School choice is at the center of my plan.
My proposal redirects education spending to allow every disadvantaged child in America to attend the public, private, charter, magnet, religious or home school of their choice.
School choice is the great civil rights issue of our time, and I will be the nation's biggest cheerleader for school choice in all 50 states.
I will also appoint a commission to investigate the school to prison pipeline and to shut it down and create a new pathway that leads from a great education to a great job.
My plan will also ensure funding for Historical Black Colleges and Universities, more affordable 2 and 4-year college, and support for trade and vocational education.
Finally, today, my agenda includes the protection of religious liberty, the promotion of family, and support for the African-American church.
This is just the beginning.
Because I will never, ever take the African-American community for granted.
It will be my mission to prove to this country that yesterday does not have to be tomorrow.
The cycle of poverty can be broken, and great new things can happen for our people.
But to achieve this future, we must reject the failed elites in Washington who've been wrong about virtually everything for decades.
The people opposing us promised that passing NAFTA, and opening our markets to China, would bring a new era of prosperity and job creation.
Instead, they brought only poverty and heartache.
The people opposing us are the same people who've wasted $6 trillion on wars in the Middle East that have produced only more terrorism, more death, and more suffering ... imagine if that money had been spent at home.
My opponent unleashed ISIS on the world.
She tried to build Democracy in Libya, and failed.
She tried to build Democracy in Iraq, and failed.
She tried regime change in Egypt, and failed.
She pressed regime change in Syria, and failed.
She tried a Russian Reset that failed.
She tried an Asia Pivot that failed.
Now, Hillary Clinton wants to confront nuclear-armed Russia with a shooting war in Syria that could lead us into World War III.
Finally, our opponents passed a healthcare law, embraced by Hillary Clinton, over the furious objections of the American voter.
Obamacare is now destroying our healthcare system ... premiums are skyrocketing double-digits and are surging by more than 100% in the great state of Arizona.
Doctors are quitting, insurers are leaving, and companies are fleeing.
Every prediction they made about this law was a lie.
If we don't repeal and replace this disastrous law, we will lose our healthcare system forever.
Now is the time to embrace a New Direction.
I've been very lucky and have led a great life.
Now I want to give back to the country which has been so good to me.
I just left a hotel on Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington D.C., delivered under budget, and ahead of schedule, creating thousands of jobs, including construction.
It will be one of the finest hotels anywhere in the world, and a great symbol for our country.
I took two hours to fly into Washington, to cut the ribbon with my children, and then jump on the plane to be here with you.
I wanted to be there for my children, who worked so hard on this hotel -- parents must stick with, encourage, and support their children.
They did a great job on the hotel, and I told them so.
Likewise, the workers did a magnificent job -- without them, it could never have been built so quickly and so beautifully.
The rebuilding we did of the Old Post Office is the rebuilding I want to do for our country.
I want to go into the inner cities, the poor rural communities, and the failing schools, and I want to work on a national plan for revitalization.
I'm tired of the excuses from our politicians.
I'm tired of being told what can't be done.
I'm tired of people asking Americans to defer their dreams to another day, but really another decade.
Enough waiting.
The time is now.
There is nothing we can't accomplish.
There is no task or project too great.
There is no dream outside our reach.
Everywhere I go in this country, all I see is untapped potential waiting to be set free.
But we will never realize that potential if we continue putting our faith in a broken political system that has let us down time and again.
We have to choose the more optimistic path ... we have to choose to believe not in our politicians, but to believe in ourselves and in our country.
If we do that, anything is possible.
I'm asking America to join me in dreaming big and bold things for our future.
Let's close the history books on the failures in Washington, and let's open a new chapter of success and prosperity for everyone.
I am humbled beyond words to be the nominee for the Party of Abraham Lincoln.
And it is my highest and greatest hope that the Republican Party can be the home of the African-American vote once again.
Together, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
And we will Make America Great Again For All Americans.
Great polls keep coming in.
A brand new Rasmussen poll has us up 5 points nationwide.
On November 8th, we are going to win this state and we are going to win the White House.
We are going to replace our failed and corrupt establishment with a new government that serves you, your family, and your country.
At the center of our society is going to be a simple promise to every American: safety.
We are going to Make America Safe Again.
The rioting in our streets is a threat to all peaceful citizens.
It must be ended.
The main victims of these violent demonstrations are law-abiding African-Americans who live in these communities and only want to raise their children in peace.
Who is looking out for them?
For every one violent disruptor, there are thousands of moms and dads in those same communities who just want their kids to be able to walk home safely from school.
To all our citizens, in all of our inner cities, and all across the country, I say these words to you tonight: I'm with you and I will fight for you.
The job of a leader is to stand in someone else's shoes and see things from their perspective.
Hillary Clinton calls people who don't support her deplorable, and irredeemable.
I call anyone who doesn't support me an American citizen who is entitled to equal representation under the law.
I will be a President for all Americans, and I will campaign for every last vote, in every last community.
I will extend my hand to every mayor in this country who wants to be a partner in making our cities safer for their citizens.
But to do this, we must work with our police ... not against our police.
Those peddling the narrative of cops as a racist force in our society ... a narrative supported with a nod by my opponent ... share directly in the responsibility for the unrest that is afflicting our country and hurting those who have the very least.
Low-income African-Americans in these communities are the ones suffering in terms of lost jobs, lost property values, and lost lives.
65 people have been shot in the city of Chicago alone since Friday.
The problem is not that there are too many police.
The problem is that there are not enough police.
Police are entrusted with immense responsibility, and we must do everything we can to ensure they are properly trained, that they respect all members of the public, and that any wrongdoing is always vigorously addressed.
But our men and women in blue also need our support, our thanks, and our gratitude.
They are the line separating civilization from chaos.
Hillary Clinton does not have to worry about the sirens and the gunshots at night.
No, it's the poor family living in the inner city ... it's the mother who feels like a refugee in her own country.
Who is there to represent these families?
Hillary Clinton doesn't want to hear their voices.
So I will be their voice, and I will be a voice for all of the forgotten Americans in this country.
People who just want a secure community for their families, good schools for the kids, and a good-paying job to support their loved ones.
We will bring security to our African-American communities, and to our Latino communities.
We will also bring school choice, and new prosperity.
Democrats have run our inner cities for more than half a century.
It's time for change ... it's time for a New American Future.
My economic agenda can be summed up in three very beautiful words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
My opponent likes to say that for decades, she has been "fighting for women."
That she has been "fighting for children."
Why then are 70 million American women and children living in poverty, or on the brink of poverty?
Why has she provided no relief for the millions of Americans in search of affordable, reliable quality childcare?
You know the old saying, "Watch what I do, not what I say."
At the Trump Organization, and in my campaign for President, women occupy some of the highest positions.
I have employed thousands of women in my company.
Women of different backgrounds.
Women of many talents.
And just last week here in Pennsylvania, I was joined by my daughter, Ivanka, and I laid out my plan for childcare and eldercare.
We have also talked about improving education, and I will talk about it more tonight.
A first-class public school education, as well as options for alternatives through charter schools, school choice, and homeschooling, is a right, not a privilege.
The opportunity to attend a two or four-year college, or to pursue a trade or a skill set through vocational and technical education, should be easier to access, pay for, and finish.
Education is the bedrock of our society.
Women also value security.
They want a Commander-in-Chief that will defeat radical Islamic terrorism and protect our borders.
As I campaign across this country, I hear so many stories and pleas, from women especially, about drug addiction and opioid use.
They are doing their best in their communities and for their families to provide a safe and nurturing environment.
But even the best-laid plans cannot always protect our youth, and increasingly, many adults, from the scourge of drugs.
We lose thousands of our fellow Americans every year to opioid use.
I will stop the drug inflow from our borders.
These drugs come over the border and make their way into our urban and rural communities, and into our suburbs.
This must change.
Every change starts with a conversation.
Together, we will have this conversation.
And we will make this change.
The changes will start immediately.
On my first day in office, I am going to immediately begin lifting all regulations that are hurting our workers and our businesses.
This will unleash a technology revolution.
America will become the best place to innovate and to invest in the future.
The next great American invention, the next great improvement to our lives, is right around the corner.
All we have to do is remove the red tape.
Our plan includes one of the biggest tax reforms in American history.
It's going to include a 15% tax rate for all businesses, small and large, making our country a magnet for new jobs.
We are going to unleash an American Energy Revolution.
Oil, coal, natural gas, shale energy, and renewables.
This will add at least half a million new jobs every single year.
But to be a prosperous nation, we need to be a country that makes and builds things in our own country.
That is why I will direct the Department of Commerce to identify every single violation of our trading rules by our foreign competitors.
We will apply every lawful remedy to end these trade abuses.
Steel jobs, and all manufacturing jobs, will be returning to Pennsylvania in a very big way.
Your state has lost one-third of your manufacturing jobs since NAFTA, and one-fourth of your manufacturing jobs since China joined the World Trade Organization.
These were both Bill Clinton deals backed by Hillary Clinton.
The Clintons robbed Pennsylvania, stole your jobs, and shipped them to other countries ... we are going to bring them back.
Jobs will come flowing back in all over America.
It used to be that cars were made in Flint and you couldn't drink the water in Mexico.
Today, the cars are made in Mexico and you can't drink the water in Flint.
We're going to turn it all around.
There's a reason the hedge fund managers are all donating to Hillary Clinton's campaign ... and not mine.
Everybody getting rich off the rigged system, and who wants nothing to change, are throwing their money at Hillary Clinton.
My campaign is powered by my own money, and by small dollar donations from everyday patriotic citizens.
95% of our donors are small dollar donations.
Every dollar helps us deliver your country back to you ... visit DonaldJTrump.com to find out how you can help our movement.
Let me tell you what else we're going to do.
One of the biggest problems facing young people and families today is the cost of college education.
The cost of college has increased by over 500% since 1973.
But what a lot of people don't know is that universities get massive tax breaks for their massive endowments.
These huge multi-billion dollar endowments are tax-free, but too many of these universities don't use the money to help with tuition and student debt.
Instead, these universities use the money to pay their administrators, or put donors' names on buildings, or just store the money away.
In fact, many universities spend more on private equity fund managers than tuition programs.
But they should be using the money on the students ... for tuition, for student life, and for student housing.
On top of that, the federal government spends over $70 billion in higher education every year, plus another $130 billion on federal loans.
Here again, the universities don't use the money to reduce the price of college ... but to increase it.
We have to break this cycle.
I'm going to work with Congress on reforms to make sure that if universities want access to all of these special federal tax breaks and tax dollars ... paid for by you ... that they are making a good faith effort to reduce the cost of college and student debt, and to spend their endowments on their own students.
Another major issue for all American families is healthcare.
President Obama promised Obamacare would reduce the cost of healthcare by $2,500 dollars.
Instead, the opposite happened ... the cost of healthcare has increased nearly $5,000 dollars during that time.
Just one more Washington lie ... like the lie that if you like your doctor you can keep your doctor.
It's a disaster.
That is why, on my first day, I am going to ask Congress to immediately send me a bill to repeal and replace disastrous Obamacare.
We are going to replace government-run Obamacare with reforms that put patients first.
These reforms include expanding access to popular Healthcare Savings Accounts, empowering Americans to shop for the insurance of their choice across state lines, and block granting Medicaid to the states so they can design innovative solutions to best serve our most vulnerable citizens.
Hillary Clinton, on the other hand, wants to give Obamacare to illegal immigrants and wants a total government takeover of healthcare.
Her plan also gives Social Security and Medicare to illegal immigrants, by making them citizens ... bankrupting these programs for Americans.
She doesn't understand how Democracy works.
Public servants are just that ... they're there to serve you.
But the only people Hillary Clinton has ever served are the special interests.
Our campaign is about breaking-up the special interest monopoly in Washington, D.C. We're trying to disrupt the collusion between the wealthy donors, the large corporations, and the media executives.
They're all part of the same political establishment.
They go to the same restaurants, they attend the same conferences, they have the same friends and connections.
They all support the same ideology of globalism that makes them rich while shipping your jobs, your factories, and your wealth to other countries.
I am not running to be President of the World.
I am running to be President of the United States.
I Am For America ... and America First.
Together, we will rebuild this country beyond our greatest dreams.
Government will start working again.
Fixing things is what I do.
Just look at my projects in New York, where I turned rundown spaces into new centers of business, activity and opportunity ... where others saw only problems, I saw only potential.
We turned empty lots into homes, offices and living memories for thousands of workers and families.
That's what I want to do for our country ...
I want to go into the neglected neighborhoods, the failing schools, the forgotten stretches of this nation, and unlock their potential for all of our people.
I've made a living for years looking at unused spaces and imagining what they could be.
Politicians look at blighted neighborhoods and offer only excuses ...
I look at those same neighborhoods and offer solutions.
We spend so much time thinking about how things used to be, we've stopped thinking about how great things could be ... all we have to do is tune out the doubters, the cynics, and the naysayers.
We are a nation of strivers, dreamers, and believers ... and that's the spirit that will carry us to victory in November, and to great victories as a nation.
It's that same spirit of resilience I have seen visiting the flood-ravaged towns in Louisiana, or meeting with the incredible but hard-hit people in cities and towns like Flint, Michigan.
It's that spirit of strength we will need to start winning again as a country.
But that means you need to show up and vote on November 8th.
You have to knock on doors.
You have to pick up that phone.
Go to our website to learn more.
You have to campaign on the streets.
Spread the love that we have in this room to the people of our country.
To beat the system, you have to lift your voice, pound the pavement, and get out the vote.
You have 46 days to change the world.
You have 46 days to make possible every dream you ever dreamed of for your country.
You have one magnificent chance to deliver justice for every forgotten man, woman and child in this nation.
The arrogance of Washington, D.C. will soon come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter.
This November 8th, we are going to show the whole world that America is Back ...
Bigger and Better and Stronger than Ever Before.
Here is just some of what will happen starting in January of 2017:
I am going to lower your taxes; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; unleash American energy; appoint justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold the Constitution of the United States; close our border to terrorists, save the 2nd amendment; and put American workers first.
We will rebuild our roads, bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools and hospitals.
American cars will travel the roads, American planes will soar in the skies, and American ships will patrol the seas.
American steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds.
American hands will rebuild this nation ... and American energy, harvested from American sources, will power this nation.
American workers will be hired to do the job.
We will put new American steel into the spine of this country.
I will fight for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as One American People.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
It is time to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a new, inclusive and prosperous American future.
Jobs will return, incomes will rise, and new factories will come rushing onto our shores.
Once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
We just got new polls from Bloomberg and CNN.
We're up five points in Ohio, and the LA Times poll has us up 5 points nationwide.
The people of the United States are ready for change.
They're ready to discard a failed political establishment that disdains, disrespects and looks down on hardworking people.
This election is about a choice between the control of an arrogant ruling class in Washington D.C. versus the hopes and dreams of everyday citizens.
For years, our leaders have looked out only for themselves.
There is no greater example of this in our country than Flint, Michigan.
The city of Flint was once known as Buick City.
More than 80,000 workers were employed by GM in 1970 ... today, its less than 8,000.
Forty percent of the city's residents are living in poverty.
Violent crime is among the nation's highest.
Today I went to Flint, Michigan to address the water crisis.
The water crisis in Flint demonstrates failure at every single level of government.
It's tragic and it's heartbreaking, and it should never happen in the United States of America.
This is the catastrophe that happens when we build up other countries instead of our own.
It used to be cars were made in Flint and you couldn't drink the water in Mexico.
Now, the cars are made in Mexico and you can't drink the water in Flint.
We are going to turn this around.
We are going to bring our jobs back and protect our people.
Driving through the city you see the shuttered homes and businesses, the dilapidated infrastructure.
This is what our politicians have done to this city, this is what our politicians have done to America.
But nowhere has the pain been worse than our inner cities.
Democratic politicians have ran our inner cities for 50, 60, 70 years.
Their policies have produced massive poverty, joblessness, and failing schools.
They've trapped Americans in suffering for years, and I'm running to offer a better future.
Lower crime, better schools, more jobs ... safety, security, opportunity.
Now, I understand there are going to be some people in these communities who aren't planning on voting for me right now.
I will campaign hard for their votes ... we can't stay the course our country is on.
If you keep voting for the same people, you'll keep getting the same results.
I am willing to campaign anywhere.
I am willing to go anywhere, visit anywhere, even if some voters openly oppose me in a community I will go there and ask them for their support.
Hillary Clinton calls people who aren't supporting her deplorable and irredeemable.
I call people who aren't supporting me American citizens who are entitled to the same respect as anyone else ... and I will not stop campaigning for every last American vote, in every last American community, right up until November 8th.
I will take my message to communities that are 99% Democrat, or that have voted Democrat for generations.
I am running to be President for all Americans, to represent all Americans, and to liberate our poorest citizens from crime and poverty and violence.
The economic policies of Hillary Clinton ... on trade, on the economy, on immigration ... have devastated the inner cities of America.
Her policies are the problem; we are offering the solution.
Hillary Clinton believes in globalism ... taking jobs from Flint and moving them to other countries.
I am not running to be President of the world ...
I am running to be President of the United States.
I am running to bring hope to Flint, to Canton, and to every party of this country.
If we don't break free from our partisan boxes, then nothing will ever change ... it's time to vote for America and America First.
Hillary Clinton's refugee plans will cost $400 billion dollars in the long-term.
That's enough money to rebuild the entire water infrastructure of the United States.
President Obama just announced a 30% increase to refugee admissions, bringing the total to 110,000 refugees in just one single year.
Instead of providing free healthcare and jobs to millions of refugees, we need to rebuild our inner cities and take care of Americans.
Our support comes from every part of America, and every walk of life.
You are cops and soldiers; mechanics and accountants; young and the old; black, white and Latino.
You are moms and dads, children and grandparents, you are from cities small and large and in-between.
But above everything else, you are all Americans.
Hillary Clinton's attacks on you display the same sense of arrogance and entitlement that led her to violate federal law as Secretary of State, hide and delete her emails, destroy her phones with a hammer, put classified information in the reach of our enemies, lie to Congress, and sell government favors and access through the Clinton Foundation.
Now the people who destroyed the emails are all pleading the fifth amendment in front of Congress.
There is no greater threat to Democracy than when a public official puts their office up for sale.
Look at what she did with Russian Uranium, or with UBS bank, or with the contracts in Haiti.
Hillary Clinton's record as Secretary of State is one of historic failure.
Just look at what she did to the Middle East ... in Iraq, in Syria, in Libya.
Not to mention her failures in Russia, China and North Korea.
One failure after another ... all while raising millions and millions from her friends in Wall Street.
The policies of Hillary Clinton have produced only destruction overseas and poverty at home.
1 in 5 American households do not have a single member in the labor force.
Another 14 million people left the labor force entirely since 2009.
And the national debt has doubled.
I am running to reverse these policies, and to create a future of prosperity for all Americans.
My economic agenda can be summed up in three words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
That begins with a new America-First trade policy.
Hillary Clinton's bad judgement was seen in her support for Bill Clinton's NAFTA, her support for China's entry into the World Trade Organization, and her support for the TPP ... she called it the "Gold Standard."
Ohio has lost nearly 1 in 3 manufacturing jobs since NAFTA, and 1 in 4 since China entered the WTO.
Our trade deficit in goods with the world is now nearly $800 billion dollars.
I will renegotiate NAFTA, I will defend your jobs, and I will bring back vehicle production to the United States of America.
America's trade deficit with the proposed TPP member countries cost the state of Ohio more than 100,000 manufacturing jobs last year.
Imagine how many more jobs would be lost if TPP was actually approved ... which Hillary Clinton 100% would do if she ever got the chance.
We won't let that happen.
But you have to get out and vote.
My first day in office, I am also going to order a review of every single regulation issued over the last eight years.
All needless, job-killing regulations will be cancelled.
Millions of new jobs will come pouring in.
We are going to lift the restrictions on American energy.
Also on my first day, I am going to ask Congress to send me a bill to immediately repeal and replace disastrous Obamacare.
I will fight for you against the special interests, against the corrupt politicians, and against the powerful insiders.
Let me be your champion.
In all things, it's time to put Americans first ... and start taking care of each other.
Yesterday, I rolled out a plan to help our mothers and our families get affordable, quality childcare for their children.
On policy after policy, we are going to bring opportunity and prosperity to all Americans.
I am going to lower you taxes; I am going to get rid of massive amounts of unnecessary regulations, on business and in your life; I'm going to repeal and replace Obamacare; I'm going to appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will follow the Constitution; I'm going to rebuild our depleted military and take care of our vets; I'm going to save your 2nd amendment [NRA endorsement]; I'm going to stop illegal immigration and drugs coming into our country, and yes, we will build the wall [Mexico will pay]; and I'm going to, so importantly, renegotiate your horrible trade deals, especially NAFTA ... which is the single worst trade deal ever made by any country anywhere in the world and a one-way street for jobs out of the United States ... and we will make great trade deals that put the American worker first.
And Apple, and our other major companies, will start making their iPhones, computers and other products inside of the United States ... not in China, and all over the world.
We don't make our products anymore in the United States, but we will again ... like never before.
We will rebuild our roads, bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools and hospitals.
We will rebuild our water infrastructure, and our EPA will abandon political agendas and focus on its core mission: clean air and safe water.
American cars will travel the roads, American planes will soar in the skies, and American ships will patrol the seas.
American steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds.
American hands will rebuild this nation ... and American energy, mined from American sources, will power this nation.
American workers will be hired to do the job.
We will put new American steel into the spine of this country.
I will fight for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as One American People.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
It is time to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a new, inclusive and prosperous American future.
Jobs will return, incomes will rise, and new factories will come rushing back to our shores.
Once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
I also want to thank the Marcellus Shale Coalition, the Ohio Oil and Gas Association, and the West Virginia Oil and Natural Gas Association for inviting me to join you here today.
Your organizations represent tens of thousands of jobs for hardworking Americans.
Let me also recognize my friend, Harold Hamm.
It is great to be here in Pittsburgh, the Steel City.
Under a Trump Administration, we are going to bring back our steel jobs and we are going to rebuild this nation.
Before going any further today, I want to address the turmoil unfolding right now in our country.
Our country desperately needs unity, and it needs the spirit of togetherness that has not only got us through our toughest times ... but which has lifted us up, in the past, to our greatest achievements as a nation.
Every day, I see people of different backgrounds working together for a common good, and we need to bring that spirit to every part of our country ... and become One American Nation, united by our shared values and principles as American Citizens.
We all have to walk a mile in someone else's shoes, see things through their eyes, and then get to work fixing our wounded country.
Many Americans are watching the unrest in Charlotte unfolding on their TV screens.
Others are witnessing the chaos and the violence firsthand. 
Our country looks bad to the world, especially when we are supposed to be the leader.
How can we lead when we can't even control our own cities.
We honor and recognize the right of all Americans to peacefully assemble, protest and demonstrate.
But there is no right to engage in violent disruption, or to threaten the public safety and peace.
Every single American in this country is entitled to live in a safe community.
The violence against our citizens, and our law enforcement, must be brought to an end.
The people who will suffer the most as a result of these riots, are law-abiding African-American residents who live in these communities.
It is their jobs, housing markets, schools and economic conditions that will suffer ... and the first duty of government is to protect their well-being and safety.
There is no compassion in tolerating lawless conduct.
Crime and violence is an attack on the poor, and will never be accepted in a Trump Administration.
Our job is not to make life more comfortable for the violent disruptor, but to make life more comfortable for the African-American parent trying to raise their kids in peace.
For every one violent protestor, there are thousands of moms and dads and kids in that same community who just want to be able to sleep safely at night.
More law enforcement, more community engagement, more effective policing is what our country needs.
Last year, we saw a 17% rise in violent crime in our fifty largest cities.
Homicides are up nearly 50% in Washington, D.C. and more than 60% in Baltimore.
More than 3,000 have been shot in Chicago so far this year alone.
Nationwide, approximately 60% of murder victims under the age of 22 are African-American.
This is a national crisis, and it is the job of the next President to work with our governors and mayors to address this crisis and save African-American lives.
Look at the example of Mayor Rudy Giuliani in New York.
The policies he put into place ultimately brought down crime by 76 percent and murder by 84 percent.
Think of how many families these policies saved from the worst heartache imaginable.
We need a national anti-crime agenda to make our cities safe again.
I will appoint the best prosecutors, investigators and federal law enforcement officers in the country to dismantle the international cartels, gangs and criminal syndicates ... and I will stop the drugs from flowing into our country.
My Administration will work with local communities and local officials to make the reduction of crime a top priority.
Safety is the foundation of the ladder to American success: a great education, and a good-paying job.
To have the best schools, and the best jobs, you must have safe communities.
That means we must recognize the contributions of our police, who come from all backgrounds and all walks of life, and who often thanklessly risk their own lives to protect the innocent.
We all remember, earlier this year, when officers in Dallas ... hunted down for execution ... continued protecting the public until their last moments on earth.
Every day, police officers risk their lives for complete strangers and, every year, many of them will go out on calls and never return.
Police are entrusted with immense responsibility, and we must do everything we can to ensure they are properly trained, that they respect all members of the public, and that any wrongdoing is always vigorously addressed.
But our men and women in blue also need our support, our thanks, and our gratitude.
They are the line separating civilization from total chaos.
They are also the front lines of defense in the War on Terror, as we saw recently with their quick action following the terrorist attacks in New Jersey, and New York, and the off-duty police officer's heroic actions in Minnesota.
In addition to providing safety, we must provide economic opportunity.
That begins with school choice, and leads to a secure job with a rising income.
This brings us to the subject of energy.
Producing more American energy is a central part of my plan to Making America Wealthy Again ... especially for the poorest Americans.
America is sitting on a treasure trove of untapped energy ... some $50 trillion dollars in shale energy, oil reserves and natural gas on federal lands, in addition to hundreds of years of coal energy reserves.
It's all upside: more jobs, more revenues, more wealth, higher wages, and lower energy prices.
I am going to lift the restrictions on American energy, and allow this wealth to pour into our communities ... including right here in Pennsylvania.
According to the Institute for Energy Research, lifting the restrictions on American energy, including shale production, will accomplish the following:
increase GDP by more than $100 billion annually
add over 500,000 new jobs annually
increase annual wages by more than $30 billion over the next 7 years
increase federal, state, and local tax revenues by almost $6 trillion over 4 decades
increase total economic activity by more than $20 trillion over the next 40 years.
In addition, we will streamline the permitting process for all energy infrastructure projects, including the billions of dollars in projects held up by President Obama ... creating countless more jobs in the process.
Overall, my entire economic plan ... tax reform, regulatory reform, energy reform, and trade reform ... will create at least 25 million new jobs over the next 10 years, assuming an average growth rate of 3.5 percent, and I believe we will reach 4% growth.
My tax plan includes a fifteen percent business tax rate, for small and large businesses, down from 35 percent today ... turning America into a jobs magnet.
Hillary Clinton would raise taxes on some small businesses to as high as 45 percent.
Income taxes will be simplified from 7 brackets to 3, and middle class Americans will get a major tax cut ... including childcare deductions and tax-free childcare savings accounts.
My plan includes the elimination of all unnecessary regulations, and a temporary moratorium on new regulations not compelled by Congress or public safety.
Overregulation is costing our economy $2 trillion a year.
On energy, my economic plan unlocks our shale oil and gas, and the energy technologies of both today and tomorrow.
Finally, my plan includes a renegotiation of America's trade deals, and the enforcement of trade rules, to increase jobs and wealth inside the United States.
Strong border controls will also protect our workers and save our budget trillions in the long-term.
It is perhaps the most pro-growth economic plan in American history.
Compare that to my opponent.
She plans a $1.3 trillion tax hike, massive new regulations, the offshoring of American jobs, and the aggressive restriction of American energy production.
Her plan will help only her wealthy donors, and global special interests, who benefit from the rigged system.
Hillary Clinton wants to put the coal miners out of work, ban hydraulic fracturing in most places, and extensively restrict and ban energy production on public lands and in most offshore areas.
This will produce devastation for states like Pennsylvania, Ohio, and West Virginia, where shale energy and coal production are critical parts of the economy.
Her plan hurts states like Colorado, Florida, Virginia, North Carolina, and any anywhere with access to either onshore or offshore energy resources.
She also supports blocking the energy infrastructure that is needed to move our energy resources to the marketplace.
According to the Wall Street Journal, "Overall, more than a dozen [fossil fuel] projects, worth about $33 billion, have been either rejected by regulators or withdrawn by developers since 2012, with billions more tied up in projects still in regulatory limbo."
Examples of energy transportation projects blocked or abandoned include an $850 million coal export facility in Washington, a $3 billion natural gas pipeline in the Northeast, and a $6.8 billion Liquid Natural Gas export facility, among others.
Billions of dollars in private infrastructure investment have been lost to the Obama-Clinton restriction agenda.
The platform produced by Hillary Clinton's party this year also calls for a "price on carbon."
That's just political-speak for a massive new tax on coal and shale production ... a tax on American consumers.
And remember, every energy dollar that isn't harvested here in America is harvested instead in a foreign country ... often foreign countries not very friendly to us.
That not only means we are sending our jobs to those countries, but it means energy is being produced in foreign countries that lack our high environmental and conservation standards.
That is just one more reason why we should pursue the safe and responsible production of America's vast energy reserves.
We need an America-First energy plan.
This means opening federal lands for oil and gas production; opening offshore areas; and revoking policies that are imposing unnecessary restrictions on innovative new exploration technologies.
The development of the Marcellus and Utica Shales will fundamentally change the economic landscape of this region and our country, bringing extraordinary new prosperity to millions ... more jobs, higher wages, a larger tax base, and dollars flowing into our country for a change, instead of out of our country.
Hillary Clinton's war on energy will cost our economy $5 trillion dollars.
She has not only declared war on the miners but on oil and natural gas production ... which supports 10 million jobs in the United States.
Access to low-cost liquid natural gas also supports the American chemical industry, which supports 40,000 jobs in Pennsylvania.
We have just begun, as a nation, to recognize our economic advantage that is made possible by shale energy.
The Shale Energy Revolution will unleash massive wealth for American workers and families.
At the same time, this energy revolution will produce new demand for American steel.
But federal restrictions remain a major impediment to both shale production specifically, and energy production in general.
Currently, less than 10 percent of the federally managed surface and mineral estates are leased for oil and gas development.
Almost 90% of our nation's offshore acreage is off-limits to energy production.
Our energy policy will make full use of our domestic energy sources, including traditional and renewable energy sources.
That means we will end the war on coal.
I will rescind the coal mining lease moratorium, the excessive Interior Department stream rule, and conduct a top-down review of all anti-coal regulations issued by the Obama Administration.
We will eliminate the highly-invasive "Waters of the US" rule, and scrap the $5 trillion dollar Obama-Clinton Climate Action Plan and the Clean Power Plan ... these unilateral plans will increase monthly electric bills by double-digits without any measurable improvement in climate.
I will refocus the EPA on its core mission of ensuring clean air, and clean, safe drinking water for all Americans.
I believe firmly in conserving our wonderful natural resources and beautiful natural habitats.
My environmental agenda will be guided by true specialists in conservation, not those with radical political agendas.
It will be a future of conservation, of prosperity, and of great success.
It will be a future of new technology, new innovation, and new solutions.
It will be a future we can achieve together, beginning with a victory on November 8th.
We Will make America Wealthy Again.
We Will make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
Come November 8, we are going to win this state and we are going to win the White House.
We are going to bring back your jobs.
We are going to cut your taxes.
We are going to renegotiate our disastrous trade deals.
And we are going to protect our country from Radical Islamic Terrorism.
Over the weekend, there were Islamic terrorist attacks in Minnesota and New York City, and in New Jersey.
These attacks were made possible because of our extremely open immigration system, which fails to properly vet and screen the individuals or families coming into our country.
Attack after attack ... from 9/11 to San Bernardino to Orlando ... we have seen how failures to screen who is entering the United States puts all of our citizens in danger.
So let me state this very clearly: immigration security is national security.
My opponent has the most open borders policy of anyone ever to seek the presidency.
As Secretary of State, she allowed thousands of criminal aliens to be released into our communities because their home countries wouldn't take them back.
Now Obama wants to bring in an additional 110,000 refugees, and Hillary wants a 550% increase in Syrian refugees.
Altogether, Hillary Clinton's plan would bring in 620,000 refugees in her first term ... with no effective way to screen or vet them.
Her plan would cost $400 billion dollars in terms of lifetime welfare and entitlement costs.
This isn't just a matter of terrorism, but also quality of life.
We want to make sure we are only admitting people into our country who love our country.
My highest duty as President is to protect our citizens and to uphold the Constitution of the United States.
I will honor that duty to the fullest extent every single day ... and I will never waver in that sacred obligation.
It's just a plain fact that our current immigration system makes no real attempt to determine the views of the people entering.
Since 9/11, hundreds of immigrants and their children have been implicated in terrorism and terrorist-related activity in the United States.
Now we learn that another 858 immigrants from dangerous countries have slipped into our country and been granted citizenship despite pending deportation orders.
This is unacceptable.
Altogether, there are nearly 1 million individuals in the United States with deportation orders who have not yet been removed.
In the 20th Century, the United States defeated Fascism, Nazism, and Communism.
Now we must defeat Radical Islamic Terrorism.
Yet, my opponent won't even say the words Radical Islamic Terrorism.
In fact, Hillary Clinton talks tougher about my supporters than she does about Islamic terrorists.
She calls the patriotic Americans who support our campaign ... many of them cops and soldiers ... deplorable and irredeemable.
Has she ever talked that way about Radical Islam, or about those who oppress and murder women and gays overseas?
Has Hillary Clinton ever called people who support these practices deplorable and irredeemable?
In many countries overseas, non-believers face the death penalty ... where is Hillary's condemnation here?
Let's ask Hillary Clinton: how many people who subscribe to Radical Islamic views, and support the oppression of non-believers, would you call deplorable or irredeemable ... or are those words reserved only for hardworking Americans that truly love their country and that support Donald Trump?
America can never elect a President, like Hillary Clinton, who apparently, with her choice of words, thinks decent American citizens are a bigger threat than Radical Islamic Terrorists.
Anyone who cannot name our enemy, is not fit to lead this country.
Anyone who cannot condemn the hatred, oppression and violence of Radical Islam lacks the moral clarity to serve as our President.
The commander-in-chief of this nation must speak with moral clarity and conviction.
Our system of government is the best in the world and, as your President, I will defend our values ... and speak out against all those who assault our values in any way.
It's also time to remember one very important word: accountability.
All this disaster with ISIS happened on Hillary Clinton's watch.
Her policies in Iraq, Libya and Syria are responsible for the rise of ISIS.
Her attacks on me are all meant to deflect from her record of unleashing this monstrous evil upon us.
Her timetable withdrawal from Iraq, her push for regime change in Libya and Syria, her open borders policies ... these are the actions that unleashed the ISIS disaster.
So she will say and do anything to distract from that record of total failure.
Her claim that my opposition to Radical Islamic Terrorism is a recruiting tool, demonstrates a level of ignorance about the terror threat that is disqualifying.
When she says my opposition to radical Islamic Terror provides "aid and comfort," to the enemy, we know that Hillary Clinton has once again demonstrated that she is dangerously unfit for office.
Her comments are not only reckless, but beneath the dignity of the office she seeks.
ISIS is torturing, murdering, executing and exterminating people in a campaign of genocide.
And what is Hillary Clinton's suggestion?
That we should censor our vocabulary so as not to upset these butchers.
I have news for Hillary Clinton: refusing to call out Radical Islam will not lessen the danger, it will only increase and embolden the danger ... just like we have seen during her disastrous and failed tenure as Secretary of State.
The rise of ISIS is Hillary Clinton's foreign policy legacy.
Secretary Clinton has helped to topple regimes, displace millions, and then opened the door to ISIS to enter our country.
How is this a smart policy?
Hillary Clinton's decisions overseas have left us with the threat we face today ... and her immigration policies will invite this threat onto our shores.
We must stop the massive inflow of refugees ... which Hillary Clinton is trying to drastically increase.
We should temporarily suspend immigration entirely from regions where safe and adequate screening cannot occur.
Pew polling shows that in many of the countries from which we draw large numbers of immigrants, extreme views about religion ... such as the death penalty for those who leave the faith... are commonplace.
It is the job of a responsible government to admit only those who we expect to succeed and flourish here, and to become part of our incredible home.
Hillary Clinton disagrees with this common sense rule, and it's one more reason why she can never be President.
It's time to break with the corruption, the bad judgement, and the failures of the past.
It is time to have a new American Future.
We are going to change our immigration system to reflect American values.
We are going to stop the policy of regime change overseas, and instead focus on working with our allies on a military campaign to utterly destroy ISIS and defeat Islamic terrorism.
This will not only require military warfare, but also financial warfare, cyber warfare, and ideological warfare.
But to win this struggle, we need to be strong at home.
We are going to rebuild our country.
And at the center of that effort will be the rebuilding of our inner cities.
Nearly 4 in 10 African-American children live in poverty, including 45% of African-American children under the age of six.
58% of African-American youth are not working.
Violent crime rose in America's fifty largest cities last year.
Homicides are up nearly 50% in Washington, D.C. and more than 60% in Baltimore.
More than 3,000 people have been shot in Chicago since January of this year.
The schools are failing, the jobs are leaving, and millions are trapped in poverty.
To the African-American community, I say: vote for Donald J. Trump.
I will fix it ...
I will bring back your jobs, I will fix your schools, and I will fight for you as no one ever has before.
It is time for a new civil rights agenda, one that promises safe communities, great education, and good-paying jobs.
My whole life has been about creating jobs.
Hillary Clinton has spent her career destroying jobs ... just look at upstate New York, and her terrible trade deals.
Hillary Clinton supported NAFTA, she supported China's entrance into the World Trade Organization, and she supported the job-killing deal with South Korea that she helped to push through.
The South Korean deal was supposed to create 70,000 jobs ... instead, we lost 100,000 jobs and our trade deficit with South Korea has more than doubled.
Next, Hillary Clinton wants the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Your state has lost more than 4 in 10 manufacturing jobs since NAFTA.
I am going to renegotiate this disastrous deal ... and if we don't get the deal we want, I will walk away.
Our trade deficit is now nearly $800 billion a year ... this is the economic legacy of Hillary Clinton.
But we are going to turn it all around.
My economic agenda can be summed up in three very beautiful words: Jobs, Jobs, Jobs.
I am going to lower your taxes; I am going to get rid of massive amounts of unnecessary regulations, on business and in your life; I'm going to repeal and replace Obamacare; I'm going to create American energy independence; I'm going to make our government lean, responsible and efficient; I'm going to fix our terrible trade deals and defend American workers; I'm going to rebuild our depleted military and take care of our vets; and I'm going to appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will follow the Constitution of the United States;
We will rebuild our roads, bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools and hospitals.
American cars will travel the roads, American planes will soar in the skies, and American ships will patrol the seas.
American steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds.
American hands will rebuild this nation ... and American energy, harvested from American sources, will power this nation.
American workers will be hired to do the job.
We will put new American steel into the spine of this country.
I will fight for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as One American People.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
It is time to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a new, inclusive and prosperous American future.
Jobs will return, incomes will rise, and new factories will come rushing onto our shores.
Once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
I want to also take a moment to recognize Congresswoman Cathy McMorris Rodgers, Chairwoman of the House Republican Conference and a mother of three small children, who has been such a leader on these issues.
We are also joined tonight by some amazing members of Congress in our audience: Congresswoman Blackburn, Lummis, Black, and Ellmers.
Our campaign is about ideas.
We're about solutions.
I've travelled all over the country in recent weeks offering detailed plans to make life better for you and your family.
I've outlined detailed proposals for providing school choice, reforming our tax and regulatory code, lifting restrictions on American energy, rebuilding our military, changing our foreign policy, fixing our immigration policy, and keeping our country safe.
Right now, our politicians have locked our country into endless fights about small and petty things.
I'm asking the nation to lift our sights, and to imagine what we can accomplish if we work together, trust each other, and put the needs of our own citizens first.
We must break our ties with the failed and bitter politics of the past and pursue a future where every American is honored and respected.
We have to reject the arrogance of Washington D.C. that looks down on everyday hardworking people.
Too often those who have power have disdain for the views, beliefs and attitudes of those who don't have political power.
Those in leadership must put themselves in the shoes of the laid-off factory worker, the family worried about security, or the mom struggling to afford childcare.
That means we need working mothers to be fairly compensated for their work, and to have access to affordable, quality child care for their kids.
We want higher pay, better wages, and a growing economy for everyone.
These solutions must update laws passed more than half a century ago when most women were still not in the labor force.
Today, nearly 2 in 3 mothers with young children have jobs.
For many families in our country, childcare is now the single largest expense ... even more than housing.
Yet, very little meaningful policy work has been done in this area ... and my opponent has no childcare plan.
Many Americans are just one crisis away from disaster ... a sick kid, a lost job, a damaged home.
There is no financial security.
But that will all change under our pro-family, pro-child, pro-worker plans I am outlining tonight.
Before going any further, I want everyone watching on TV right now to go to DonaldJTrump.com to read the full plan.
The first part of my childcare plan allows every parent or family in America ... including adoptive parents and foster parent guardians ... to deduct their childcare expenses from their income taxes.
They will be able to fully deduct the average cost of child care for their state, from birth through the age of 13.
Because of the way the benefit is capped and structured, our plan will bring relief to working and middle class families.
The deduction also applies to elder care, capped at a $5,000-dollar deduction per year.
Importantly, our policy also supports mothers who choose to stay at home, and honors and recognizes their incredible contributions
to their families and to our society.
Families with a stay-at-home parent will be able to fully deduct the average cost of child care from their taxes.
For low-income individuals who have no net income tax liability, we will offer an expanded Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) in the form of a childcare rebate.
Working parents can get an expanded EITC benefit that equals up to half of their total payroll tax ... a major relief for low-income parents.
This translates to as much as an extra $1,200 dollars in EITC benefits for working families.
Next, our plan allows every parent in America to open up a Dependent Care Savings Account.
Families can contribute up to $2,000 dollars a year to these accounts completely tax-free.
Crucially, unlike the flexible spending accounts that exist today, these accounts will be available to all Americans ... you won't have to depend on your employer to provide them.
Immediate family and employers can also contribute to a dependent account, each of which is designated for a specific child, including an unborn child.
The money that is put into these accounts can also be spent not only on child care, but also child enrichment activities.
Additionally, the funds in these accounts do not expire at the end of the year ... they don't revert to employers or to the Treasury.
Instead, the funds rollover ... so while only $2,000 dollars can be contributed each year, unspent sums can accumulate and create substantial savings.
These savings can then be used by parents to help give their kids school choice, and will thus contribute to the school choice reforms
I outlined last week.
The funds will remain in the account until the age of 18.
Whatever still remains at that time can be used to help offset the costs of higher education.
For low-income individuals, the federal government will provide matching funds ... if parents contribute $1,000 dollars, the federal government will provide a $500 dollars match.
To help low-income families reach these targets and save money, we will put a box on federal income tax forms allowing these parents to have their Earned Income Tax Credit funds directly deposited into their Dependent Care Savings Accounts.
These Dependent Care Savings Accounts can also be set-up to provide care for elderly dependents.
Our plan also includes much needed regulatory reform to incentivize private sector solutions.
The new funds offered by our plan will create a new market for innovative childcare solutions.
But to make sure these solutions are available, especially in low-income and rural communities, we must reduce regulations that favor large institutional care facilities.
We will allow the states to make the decisions that are right for them.
In this era of the sharing economy, we want parents to be able to access lower-cost, competitive and innovative solutions at the click of a button ... including services like nanny-sharing.
Our plan would also cover care provided by relatives and grandparents.
Our plan includes incentives for more employers to offer on-site childcare as well.
This can often be a good solution for many working parents, and can save them up to 30 minutes of commute time.
Currently, only 7% of employers provide these services.
Our plan will expand tax deductions for employers, allow companies to pool resources to provide shared childcare services, and remove needless requirements that have prevented employers from using the credit.
Finally, our plan offers a crucial safety net for working mothers whose employers do not provide paid maternity leave.
This solution will receive strong bipartisan support, and will be completely self-financing.
By recapturing fraud and improper payments in the unemployment insurance program, we can provide 6 weeks of paid-maternity leave to any mother with a newborn child whose employer does not provide the benefit.
This maternity leave will be paid straight out of the unemployment insurance fund and, again, this safety net will be completely paid-for through savings within the program.
There are more reforms and solutions in our childcare plan, and you can review them all on the website.
On Thursday, I will outline my full economic plan, which is completely paid for through economic growth and proposed federal budget savings.
Together, our tax, trade, regulatory, and energy policies will add trillions in new deficit-lowering growth.
These are the kinds of solutions I want to bring to the White House as your President.
It's time to free ourselves from the baskets that politicians try to put us in, and instead to work together ... not as Republicans or Democrats ... but as Americans, to achieve real, positive results for the American people.
While my opponent slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable, I call you, hard-working American Patriots who love your country, love
your families, and want a better future for all Americans.
It's time to end the rule of special interests, and to begin the rule of the American people.
It's time to stop fighting over the smallest words, and to start dreaming about the great adventures that lie ahead.
It is time to Believe In America.
Together, We Will Make Our Country Strong Again.
We Will Make Our Country Prosperous Again.
And Will Make Our Country Great Again For Everyone.
In particular, I wanted to thank our host, Tony Perkins, for his years of leadership.
[
And we all express our support for Tony as he deals with the aftermath of the terrible floods in Louisiana, where two weeks ago I spent some time, and I saw some incredible, incredible people.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thank you!
MR. TRUMP: Thank you.
[
One of the greatest privileges of my journey has been the time I've spent with the evangelical community.
And the support they gave me in those primaries was absolutely incredible, I have to tell you.
[
A lot of people said: I wonder if Donald will get the evangelicals.
I got the evangelicals.
[
There are no more decent, devoted, or selfless people than our Christians brothers and sisters here in the United States.
[
True.
So true.
I've witnessed that incredible generosity all across this land, gotten to know so many people.
I saw it during my trip to Louisiana, where Christian volunteers raced to help their fellow citizens in need.
Franklin Graham is an example.
He brought the most incredible people and equipment to Louisiana.
[
He's a great man.
It's that spirit of giving that we will need to rebuild Louisiana and to rebuild this country, which is in serious, serious trouble.
[
Yet, our media culture often mocks and demeans people of faith.
And you understand that.
All the time I hear from concerned parents how much harder it is for a Christian family to raise their children in today's media environment.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Right!
MR. TRUMP: It is right, isn't it?
[
[
Your values of love, charity and faith built this nation.
[
One of the reasons is that our politicians have really abandoned you, to a large extent.
And Hillary Clinton, you can forget about her.
[
So let me say this right up front: A Trump administration, our Christian heritage will be cherished, protected, defended, like you've never seen before.
[
I believe it.
And you believe it.
And you know it.
You know it.
And that includes religious liberty ... remember, remember.
[
Stand up if you're member.
That's good.
That was a great ... that was an amazing experience.
[
In my remarks, I spoke about how African American church ... and this is all across the country ... for centuries have been the conscience of our nation.
Their unbreakable faith and sprit overcame some of the most difficult periods in our history, leading us all to a better future.
Very true.
Amazing.
This was such an amazing experience.
[
It's the power to heal.
It's the power to unite.
It's the power to make all of us live better lives ... all of us.
[
Our nation today is divided.
Nobody likes to say it, but we're living in a very, very divided nation.
It will be our faith in God and his teachings, in each other, that will lead us back to unity.
[
Each of us here today has a role to play in bringing our country together, united in common purpose and in common values.
So let's talk today about some of the things ... and these are great things ... that we can do together to create the American future for everybody, not just a certain group of people, but for everybody.
The first thing we have to do is give our churches their voice back.
It's been taken away.
[
If they want to talk about Christianity, if they want to preach, if they want to talk about politics, they're unable to do so.
If they want to do it, they take a tremendous risk that they lose their tax-exempt status.
All religious leaders should be able to freely express their thoughts and feelings ... [
And I will repeal the Johnson amendment ... [
[
Thank you.
That's so important.
And I must tell you from the heart, this started, a building of mine in Manhattan.
I had 50 pastors in a big conference room.
And we actually had 50 pastors, two rabbis, a couple of priests.
We were all talking.
And we were there for two hours.
And at the end, it was a love-fest.
We all agreed.
It was like a love-fest.
And I said to them ... we were high up in a building on 5th Avenue ... and I said to them I'd love your support.
And I know when I can get support.
I'm quite sophisticated.
[
And I said I really would like your support.
And they didn't really know what I was talking about.
And I said, what's going on here?
They said, well, sir, we can't do that because we would be violating the laws.
And I said, what's the punishment?
Well, we could lose our tax-exempt status, which, of course, is a, you know, massive penalty.
I said, tell me about this.
And we sat down.
They talked about it.
When did it happen?
1954 or so.
Lyndon Johnson was having problems ... powerful guy.
I actually, as just own way ... you have to gain respect for what he was able to do.
Can you imagine that this man single-handedly ... he was having problems with churches.
And there was a church in Houston that was giving him a hard time, maybe for very good reason.
And he put in an amendment that basically stopped our great pastors and ministers and others from talking, under the penalty of losing their tax-exempt status.
So we were looking down onto the sidewalk and there were people walking on the sidewalk.
And I said, so, folks, what you're telling me is those people walking way, way down there on the sidewalk have really more power than you do, because they're allowed to express their feelings and thoughts openly and without penalty.
And one of the pastors, who I knew very well ... and these are powerful people; these are strong people with magnificent voices and just ... and magnificent hearts, much more importantly ... they looked at me and they said, that's actually right.
They have more power than we do.
We're not allowed to express.
And that's what I said.
We have to start thinking about this.
And I thought about it.
And then we had a large group of pastors again.
I said I have thought about it.
If I become president, we are going to knock out the Johnson amendment.
We are going to do that.
And it's not going to be hard.
It's not going to be hard.
[
When you ... when you think, from the standpoint of political, you have more than men ... let's say men are 50 percent, women are 50 percent.
You're much more than 50 percent, added together.
And I actually believe that's one of the reasons why you haven't seen Christianity and other religions within the United States going like a rocket ship ... like our polls have been going in the last four weeks, a rocket ship, right?
[
The people that you rely on on Sunday and all during the week, they've been stopped from talking and speaking by a law.
And we're going to get rid of that law and it's going to get rid of ... we're going to get rid of it so fast.
And I'm so proud to say ... honestly, I don't want to take credit, but you had 50 people in that first meeting and many more in the second.
I am so proud ...
I was just telling this to Tony ... to say that was my idea.
I figure it's the only way I'm getting to heaven, so this is going to be very ... [
[
So important.
I hope ... which means you have to get out and vote on November 8th.
You cannot ... you didn't vote four years ago.
You didn't vote.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I did.
MR. TRUMP: You did?
Well, you did.
A few of you did.
[
I look at the stats.
You didn't vote.
But this time you really have ... and this is your last chance.
This is it.
I mean, we'll never have this opportunity again.
So I hope you can get every one of your friends and just get up ... your family and your friends, and get out and vote, OK?
November 8th.
[
[
That's not going to even be a close election.
And if you don't, could be a very unhappy November 8th.
We're also going to repeal and replace disastrous Obamacare ... [
And the numbers are horrendous.
Your premiums are going up by 50, 60, 70 percent.
The deductible is so high you never get to use it unless you are going to lead a very long and very complex bad period ... very, very long.
It is a disaster.
It's a disaster, and everybody knows it.
And it's going to die of its own weight anyway, but we're going to get rid of it and we're going to replace it with some great, great alternatives ... much better health care at a much lower price.
[
Hillary Clinton wants to have completely government-run health care, which would be a disaster for the liberties and freedoms of all America.
That's what she wants.
That's what she's aiming at.
That's what Obama wanted.
He didn't quite get there, but he got this, and you see how bad this has been.
One of the biggest issues in this race is going to be the issue of school choice.
[
Millions of poor and disadvantaged students are trapped in failing schools.
This education crisis afflicts all communities, but none more so than the African-American community ... none.
The Democratic Party has run the inner cities of America for 50, 60, 70 years, some cases over a hundred years ... over a hundred years.
Their policies and their politics, and in particular the politics of people like Hillary Clinton, have produced only poverty, joblessness, and rising crime.
When she was running for the Senate in New York State, she said she was going to produce jobs, jobs, jobs in Upstate New York.
It's a disaster.
She's going to produce jobs, big thing ... jobs, we're going to bring back jobs.
Been a catastrophe.
We've lost tens of thousands of jobs.
She never did a thing.
It was all talk, no action, just like what she's doing right now is all talk, no action.
She'll talk and talk, and nothing will happen.
Only bad will happen.
But you just have to ask the people in Upstate New York.
She won because of them, and she produced absolutely nothing.
Jobs left.
It's today one of the worst, one of the most depressing places in this country.
So just remember that when you hear her talking about jobs.
I know jobs.
She doesn't know jobs.
That I can tell you.
[
I have outlined a new civil rights agenda for our time ... the right to a safe community, a great education and a secure job.
[
And I say to African-American parents, I say to Hispanic American parents ... and I say it with great respect ... our inner cities are a disaster ... crime, no jobs, education is the worst, in many cases almost worldwide bad and in many cases actually worldwide bad.
I say, with great respect, what do you have to lose?
It can't get any worse.
It can't get any worse.
You choose Donald Trump, I'm going to fix the problem.
You're going to have safety.
[
We're going to get jobs, because we're going to bring our jobs back.
Mexico's taking our jobs.
So many other places, they're taking our jobs.
What China's doing to us is horrible.
We're going to have jobs.
What do you have to lose?
I'm going to fix this.
I'm going to fix it.
[
School choice is at the center of this civil rights agenda, and my goal is to provide every single inner-city child in America that is trapped in a failing government school the freedom to attend the school of their choice.
Competition ... the schools the schools will get better and better and better.
[
And that means a private school, a religious school, a charter school or a magnet school.
School choice also means that parents can home-school their children.
[
Hillary Clinton opposes school choice because she is controlled totally, totally, like a puppet, by special interests.
Her policies will force millions of African-American and Hispanic children to remain stuck in failed government schools, leading to higher unemployment and more poverty.
The poverty levels in this country nobody will believe, nobody will believe.
My plan will break the government monopoly and make schools compete to provide the best services for our children ... [
[
This proposal begins with a $20 billion block grant from the federal government for states to pursue school choice programs.
[
[
[
If we do this, that would mean $12,000 in school choice funds for every disadvantaged student in America.
What a difference this is going to make.
The money will follow the student to the public, private or religious school that is best for them and their family.
In so many ways, you're going to have choice. 
My administration will partner with the leadership of any inner-city ... anybody ... anybody in the inner cities of America willing to run a pilot program ... and there will be a lot of them ... to provide school choice to every child in that community.
In Baltimore, for instance, that would mean more than $15,000 in funds available per student. 
As your president, I will be the biggest cheerleader for school choice you've ever seen.
[
Again, the education can't get worse.
Commo Core ... we're going to end it.
[
I will fight for every child in this country who deserve better futures.
The African-American community has heard my message that I am going to make the inner city safe again, and I'm going to bring back jobs, and I'm going to bring back the great education.
Don't be surprised ... remember this, November 8th ... don't be surprised, because we have been given a lot of support over the last three or four weeks, if on November 8th I get more African-American and Hispanic votes than anyone thought possible about a month ago.
You see what's going on?
[
They're starting ... people are starting to hear about this.
And they're saying, wow.
Wow.
They're liking it.
And again, can't get any worse.
It's going to get a lot better.
But only if I do it.
They can't do it.
The Democrats, they have ... what they've done is incredible.
And Hillary Clinton will be absolutely more of the same ... rigid.
It'll never change.
Remember, a hundred years, 70 years, 50 ... it's not going to change.
Not going to happen. 
Now, let's talk about another issue that will define the future of this country for generations to come, the United States Supreme Court.
[
The next president will not only have to fill this seat, but as many as four others.
It could even be ...
I mean, we could end up with a total of five judges by one president.
It would be record-setting.
Probably be three.
Could be four.
Could even be five.
And you pick the wrong people, you have a country that is no longer your country.
It will be a disaster. 
One of the most important issues, frankly ... other than maybe defense, because we're going to build up our military, it's so depleted.
[
We're going to protect your Second Amendment, so many things.
But one of the most important ... some people think it's actually the most important ... is the filling of the seats, United States Supreme Court.
You see what's happening right now?
Essentially it's four and four.
And you see what ... how bad it is.
We're going to pick great judges.
I've already put a list of 11 Federalist Society, highly recommended, got uniform great reviews on these 11 people.
And we are going to put truly great people.
Maybe we use Judge Scalia of the ultimate example of what we're looking for, OK?
[
This will determine whether or not we remain a constitutional republic, frankly.
That's what's going to happen.
I have pledged to appoint judges who uphold the Constitution, to protect your religious liberty, and apply the law as written.
[
We're not going to have that.
I've made public a list of judges, as I said, that will guide my selection process.
Hillary Clinton has refused to provide such a list.
And we brought it up. 
Let's see a list.
You ever saw the list you would walk out of here not feeling very well.
[
They'd be rejected.
Clinton's judicial picks would allow her to completely take over American health care, the American economy, and Americans religious liberty ... not to mention your Second Amendment, which is on very thin ice right now, as you know, because of the fact that we're at four-and-four.
If they even pick one judge who's wrong you can probably ... as you know it ... you can kiss the Second Amendment goodbye.
And we don't want to see that.
Another issue in this race of great importance to everyone in this room is the issue of course of national security.
Just today it was announced that North Korea performed its fifth nuclear test ... its fourth since Hillary Clinton became secretary of state.
It's just one more massive failure from a failed secretary of state.
[
Her policies have also put Iran onto a path of nuclear weapons, and I have to say made them overnight an absolute power.
They were dying three years ago.
The sanctions were choking them.
They would have fallen.
But Obama didn't support people that would have taken over, and I think in this case probably would have taken over the right way; had no support.
But you look at what's happened to Iran in such a short period of time.
But remember the ransom payments.
Remember, it was $400 million two weeks ago.
But then they made a mistake.
This is cash.
Remember, they said they paid cash because they couldn't open a bank account.
There was no way of sending it into a checking account.
[
You can use your plan.
You can use your doctors ... 27 times, right?
Twenty-seven times.
You can use your doctors, use your plan; turned out to be a lie.
It's all a lie.
It's all a big lie.
It's a rigged system and it's a lie.
And I'll tell you what.
I'll tell you what.
The 400 million (dollars), for those that haven't been reading the papers over the last two days, turned out to be 1.7 billion (dollars) in cash ... cash.
And I actually said ... they said, oh, that money's going to be used for terror.
I said, no, they don't need it for terror.
They've got 150 billion (dollars).
That's in addition to the $150 billion that we're giving back.
I said they don't need it.
This is going into their Swiss accounts and going into their accounts.
They're not going to use it for terror.
They have plenty of money for terror.
Think of it ... $1.7 billion (dollars) in cash ... massive, big vats of cash.
You saw them ... cartons.
I never saw anything like it.
I've seen a lot of cash.
[
Can you imagine these guys?
Planes get ... they stop.
Remember, they wouldn't give back the hostages.
They waited there for hours and hours.
And Obama kept saying, no, no, this has nothing to do ... even the hostages said they kept us waiting for a certain plane to come in, not to take them back, because they were waiting for something.
It was this ... just another lie.
But can you imagine these people sitting there and they see $1.7 billion (dollars) in cash?
Ai, yai, yai.
They think we're stupid.
[
They won't be thinking it for long.
[
[
At the same time, ISIS is hunting down and exterminating what it calls the nation of the cross.
ISIS is carrying out a genocide against Christians in the Middle East.
We cannot let this evil continue ... can 't let it.
[
To defeat ISIS, we must use military warfare, but also cyber warfare, financial warfare and ideological warfare.
It's a whole different ballgame today than it was 50 years ago and 200 years ago ... different world.
We must also establish a bipartisan goal in the United States and an international goal with our allies of defeating radical Islamic terrorism ... [
Just like we won the Cold War by identifying our enemy and building a consensus to guide a long-term strategy, so too must we do the same with Islamic terrorism.
By the way, President Obama has allowed Syrian refugees to pour into our country at unbelievable rates.
And Hillary Clinton wants to allow 550 percent more.
But it's almost impossible to get a Christian in from Syria.
They take others, but they don't take Christians ... very, very, very rare.
So I said that we need to make safe zones in the region.
We want to take care of people.
But we absolutely cannot allow this potential tremendous threat to continue, and we have to stop this.
This is going to be potentially a catastrophe for our country.
It's from within.
This could be the all-time great Trojan horse.
This could be it.
You ever notice on the ... you look at the migration trail and you see people with cellphones.
Cellphones.
And some of the cellphones have the ISIS flag printed on them.
And some of them have things far worse than that ... scenes far worse than that.
So it was the failed policies, you have to remember, of Hillary Clinton and Obama that unleashed ISIS in the first place.
If they did the right thing, you wouldn't be talking about ISIS right now.
[
You know, she tells them already there will be no boots on the ground.
Now, even if you don't want boots on the ground, you don't want to say it.
Don't say it!
Now they're saying, oh, I hope she wins.
Oh, boy, would they dream of having her as president.
Can you ... [
But even if you believe ... and I can understand that.
No boots on the ground, I can understand.
You don't say it!
Let them think they're going to go through hell.
Don't say it!
[
Can you imagine the great General Douglas MacArthur, can you imagine the great General George Patton, or one of our great generals that we have today ... General Flynn, who's here someplace ... [
I love General Flynn ... but can you imagine these people saying ...
I mean, they're basically giving out the strategy: there will be no boots on the ground.
If you don't want that, I fully understand.
Don't say it!
Don't say it!
Could you imagine MacArthur saying we're going to fight the enemy, and we're going to move our troops in in about a month, we're going to hit from behind?
[
You know, I hate to say this because we have a lot of Evangelicals in this room, but maybe we shouldn't be so honest when it comes to military strategy.
Does that make sense?
[
[
Just look at what her policies have left us with in Iraq, Syria and Libya.
The problem is Hillary Clinton is trigger-happy.
She really is.
She's trigger-happy, and yet she says no boots, which is sort of ... probably will be boots, you know.
Probably will turn out to be another disaster.
He tenure has brought us only war and destruction and death.
She's just too quick to intervene, invade, or to push for regime change with people we don't even know who they are.
And they take over, and they're far worse.
This creates the power vacuums that are filled by terrorist and groups like ISIS.
My administration, on the other hand, will work with any country that is willing to partner with us to defeat ISIS and halt radical Islamic terrorism.
And by the way, that includes Russia.
If they want to join us on knocking out ISIS, that is just fine as far as I'm concerned.
[
That's life.
But you can never fail to recognize your enemies.
We have some real enemies.
Unfortunately for our country, our enemies probably hacked into Hillary Clinton's emails.
These are the same emails she destroyed after receiving a federal subpoena.
What's that?
Using software in order to bleach the emails so you can never, ever see them.
She even mysteriously lost 13 different phones before the FBI got them, and many were destroyed with a hammer.
[
[
Destroyed them with a hammer ... the old-fashioned way, I guess.
[
The other night in the Commander in Chief Forum ... did anybody see that?
[
[
Well, we have a big debate coming up.
Who knows what's going to happen there?
But I will say, every poll has me winning big league at the Commander in Chief.
[
Now we have a debate coming up.
I don't imagine any of you going to be watching the debate, right?
[
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Don't take her bait.
Don't take her bait.
MR. TRUMP: I won't; I promise.
Hillary Clinton answered questions on her emails horribly.
That's why she lost.
That's why she did so poorly.
She was terrible.
She was ... honestly, I shouldn't be saying this ... she was terrible.
[
Every time she talks about them, she talks about them differently.
[
But there can be no answer when she deletes 33,000 emails, bleaches them so they can never be recovered ... an unheard-of practice ... hammers them into total silence.
You know what happening.
You know what's happening.
I always say, getting away with that will be the single greatest accomplishment of her career.
[
It's true.
[
They were bad.
And a lot of people said they were so totally dishonest.
And you know, she was blaming Matt Lauer.
I thought Matt Lauer did a very good job.
I mean, his questions to me were very tough.
[jeers</i>] ... to me, that was the tough one.
[
[
[
Hillary Clinton is unfit to be our president, for many reasons.
[
True.
[
It's just so bad.
[
[
And one more issue, finally issue I want to discuss today is the economy, and helping those in need.
There is no more charitable group in this country than Christians.
[
Going to do it, with a lot of other people going to help.
As you president, I will pursue a complete reform of our economy to bring back millions of new jobs into our country ... millions of new jobs.
[
They've gone to other countries.
They've gone to Mexico.
They've gone to many other countries.
China's taking massive advantage of us.
It's all so easy, believe me.
It's all so easy.
That includes, we will be doing massive tax cuts for working families and for businesses.
[
[
[
And if they don't want to renegotiate it so it becomes a two-way highway, not just a one-way highway out of the United States for our companies and our jobs, we will terminate NAFTA, believe me.
[
It's going to be America first, and it's going to be the American worker first.
[
Crucially, I will also fight for the American family and American family values.
The family must be at the center of any anti-poverty agenda.
Has to be.
[
Our country just lost one of the great champions for the American family, Phyllis Schlafly.
Great woman, really great woman.
[
I will be going to her funeral tomorrow in St. Louis.
[
Phyllis fought very hard to the very end for a free and prosperous America.
She understood that, to be truly united as a country, we can't simply turn to government or to politicians.
The bedrock of our unity is the realization that we are all brothers and sisters created by the same God.
Phyllis understood that.
[
And by the way, Phyllis endorsed me a long time ago, when it wasn't necessarily ... [
And she was incredible.
She was so brave.
She endorsed me, and that was not the thing to do at the time.
People said, Trump?
She said, he's going to win, you don't understand.
He knows how to win.
He's going to win.
[
And we went boom, boom, boom.
But I will tell you, Phyllis endorsed me at a time when it wasn't necessarily the thing to do, even the popular thing to do, and I will never forget that.
That had a huge impact.
She was a great, great, powerful woman with a tremendous heart.
And I look forward to being with her family tomorrow, because you really ... that's a celebration.
She was 92 years old.
[
We are all equal, and we all come from the same Creator.
If we remember that simple fact, then our future is truly limitless.
There is nothing we as Americans can't do.
There's a biblical verse that I have often read, and I want to repeat it again because I think it is so important to what we're trying to achieve right now for our country.
It's from 1 John, Chapter 4: "No one has ever seen God; but if we love one another, God lives in us, and His love is made complete in us."
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Amen.
MR. TRUMP: So true.
[
[
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one God, saluting one flag.
[
This is my promise to all of you: starting in 2017, we will be one American nation.
It's time to break our ties with the bitter failures of the past and to embrace a new American future.
Have to do it.
Together, we will make America believe again, we will make America united again, and we will make America great again.
Thank you very much, and God bless you.
Thank you.
[
Thank you very much.
[
In particular, I want to thank Mr. Ron Packard and Ms. Deborah Mays for hosting me at their school.
Today, we are going to discuss one of the most important issues in this campaign: school choice.
But before we do, I want to briefly discuss new revelations about Hillary Clinton's emails.
According to the FBI report: "The FBI did find that hostile foreign actors gained access to the personal email accounts of individuals with whom Clinton was in regular contact, and, in doing so, obtained emails sent to or received by Clinton on her personal account."
Remember, Hillary Clinton was emailing about the drone program ... among many other extremely sensitive matters.
This is yet more evidence that Hillary Clinton is unfit to be commander-in-chief.
By the way, the whole country saw how unfit she was at the Townhall last night, where she refused to take accountability for her failed policies in the Middle East that have produced millions of refugees, unleashed the horror of radical Islamic terrorism, and made us less safe than ever before.
Throughout it all, she put the entire country at risk in order to cover-up her pay-for-play scandals as Secretary of State.
These include scandals like giving up our uranium to Russia, doing favors for UBS bank, and selling contracts to friends and family in Haiti.
It's all about hiding her criminal enterprise at the Clinton Foundation.
As part of her criminal cover-up, Hillary Clinton's staff digitally bleached her emails after receiving a Congressional Subpoena.
Her staff also destroyed some of her 13 different phones with a hammer.
Then, when she was interviewed by the FBI, she claimed she couldn't remember important events 39 times.
She couldn't even remember whether she was trained on handling classified information.
She even said she didn't know that the letter "C" stood for confidential classified information.
All the while, as Hillary and Bill raked in millions of dollars from special interests, the world fell apart.
Hillary Clintons' policies produced ruin in Libya, Iraq, and Syria.
She failed in Russia, in China, in North Korea.
Her policies unleashed ISIS, spread terrorism, and put Iran on the path to nuclear weapons ... not to mention the ransom payments.
On top of it all, Hillary Clinton is trigger-happy.
She's raced to invade, intervene, and topple regimes.
She believes in globalism, not Americanism.
Last night, she even falsely said no American died in Libya.
Then she also falsely said there's no ground troops in Iraq, even though we have 5,000 military personnel there right now.
Iraq is one of the biggest differences in this race.
I opposed going in, and I opposed the reckless way Hillary Clinton took us out ... letting ISIS fill the void.
But I was opposed to the war from the beginning.
Long after Howard Stern, but three months before the Iraq war started, I said, in an interview with Neil Cavuto, that "perhaps [we] shouldn't be doing it yet," and that "the economy is a much bigger problem as far as the President is concerned."
Then, On March 25th of 2003, just days after the war started, I was quoted as saying the war is "a mess," yet more clear evidence that I had opposed the war from the start.
In July of 2003, I said that "I would love to see New York City and some of the cities and some of the states get some of the money that`s going toward Iraq and other places, because you know, they really need and it they need it badly."
I had a number of quotes to this effect.
Then, in August of 2004, very early in the conflict, I made a detailed statement to Esquire magazine.
"Look at the war in Iraq and the mess that we're in.
I would never have handled it that way.
Does anybody really believe that Iraq is going to be a wonderful democracy where people are going to run down to the voting box and gently put in their ballot and the winner is happily going to step up to lead the country?
C'mon.
Two minutes after we leave, there's going to be a revolution, and the meanest, toughest, smartest, most vicious guy will take over.
What was the purpose of the whole thing?
Hundreds and hundreds of young people killed.
And what about the people coming back with no arms and no legs?
Not to mention the other side.
All those Iraqi kids who've been blown to pieces.
And it turns out that all of the reasons for the war were blatantly wrong.
All this for nothing!
I would have been tougher on terrorism.
Bin Laden would have been caught long ago."
Had I been in Congress at the time of the invasion, I would have cast a vote in opposition.
For years, I have been a critic of the kind of reckless foreign invasions and interventions that have been the Hallmark of Hillary Clinton's failed career.
Here is the bottom line: I was a private citizen.
I had no access to the briefings that Hillary Clinton had.
But in Iraq, my judgement was right and hers was wrong.
Hillary Clinton is always complaining about what's wrong, but she's been there for more than 30 years and has never done anything about it ... all you have to do is look at New York State, when she was a Senator.
All talk, but nothing happened.
We're on track to spend $6 trillion altogether on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Meanwhile, massive portions of our country are in a state of disrepair.
It's time to rebuild America.
Too many Americans living in our inner cities have not been included in the American Dream.
We are one nation, and when any part of our country hurts ... our whole country hurts.
My goal as President will be to ensure that every child in this nation ... African-American, Hispanic-American, all Americans ... will be placed on the ladder of success: a great education, and a great job.
That ladder rests on a fundamental foundation: safety.
In order to help our children succeed, our first duty is to ensure that every kid in America can grow up in a safe community.
You can't have prosperity without security.
This is the new civil rights agenda of our time.
The right to a safe community, a quality education, and a secure job.
Our campaign represents the long-awaited chance to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a New American Future.
There is no failed policy more in need of urgent change than our government-run education monopoly.
The Democratic Party has trapped millions of African-American and Hispanic youth in failing government schools that deny them the opportunity to join the ladder of American success.
It is time to break-up that monopoly.
I want every single inner city child in America who is today trapped in a failing school to have the freedom ... the civil right ... to attend the school of their choice.
This includes private schools, traditional public schools, magnet schools and charter schools which must be included in any definition of school choice.
Our government spends more than enough money to easily pay for this initiative ... with billions left over.
It's simply a matter of putting students first, not the education bureaucracy.
Let's run through the numbers.
At the state and federal level, the United States spends more than $620 billion on K-12 education each year.
That's an average of about $12,296 for every student enrolled in our elementary and secondary public schools.
The federal government pays for about 10 percent...$64 billion, to be precise...of the K-12 costs.
That $64 billion makes up about half of the total spending of the U.S. Department of Education.
The other roughly $570 billion spent on K-12 education comes from the states.
We spend more per student than almost any other major country in the world.
Yet, our students perform near the bottom of the pack for major large advanced countries.
Our largest cities spend some of the largest amounts of money on public schools.
New York City spends $20,226 dollars per pupil.
Baltimore spends $15,287 dollars per student.
Chicago spends $11,976 dollars per student, and in Los Angeles it is $10,602.
Just imagine if each student in these school systems was given a scholarship for this amount of money ... allowing them and their family to choose the public or private school of their choice.
Not only would this empower families, but it would create a massive education market that is competitive and produces better outcomes.
These schools would then cater to the needs of the individual student and family ... not the needs of the Teachers' Union.
There is no more important job than a teacher, and teachers will benefit greatly from these reforms.
The current government monopoly, while great for the bureaucrats, has utterly failed too many students.
According to the National Assessment of Education Progress, only 1 in 6 African-American students in the eighth grade are considered proficient in math and reading.
Failing schools then contribute to failing economies.
In Los Angeles the official unemployment rate for African-American men is almost 20.7 percent.
In Baltimore, it is 16.2 percent, 14.7 percent in Chicago and 10.9 percent in New York City.
In Los Angeles, 26 percent of African American women live in poverty.
In Baltimore, the poverty rate for African Americans is 27 percent.
In New York, over 31 percent of African Americans live in poverty.
Nationwide, nearly 40% of African-American children live in poverty ... including 45% of children under the age of six.
Our public schools are failing to put young Americans on a path to success.
Meanwhile, we have all seen the tragic rise in crime in these communities ... which remains one of the greatest barriers to fostering opportunity and success for America's children.
Violent crime rose more than 20% in Los Angeles in 2015.
Homicides in Baltimore increased by 63%.
There have been nearly 3,000 victims of shootings in Chicago so far this year.
Government is failing our citizens at every level.
That is why I am proposing a plan to provide school choice to every disadvantaged student in America.
That means parents will be able to send their kids to the desired public, private or religious school of their choice.
Here is how it will work.
Right now, about $1.9 billion is spent on fifty private school choice programs nationwide.
These are opportunity scholarships, tax credits, and education savings accounts.
This covers about 400,000 students in our country.
Altogether, school choice is serving more than 3.4 million students nationwide.
Charter schools, in particular, have demonstrated amazing gains and results in providing education to disadvantaged children and the success of these schools will be a top priority for my Administration.
They also produce competition that causes better outcomes for everyone.
My first budget will immediately add an additional federal investment of $20 billion towards school choice.
This will be done by reprioritizing existing federal dollars.
Specifically, my plan will use $20 billion of existing federal dollars to establish a block grant for the 11 million school age kids living in poverty.
We will give states the option to allow these funds to follow the student to the public or private school they attend.
Distribution of this grant will favor states that have private school choice and charter laws, encouraging them to participate.
This $20 billion will instantly extend choice to millions more students.
A state like Ohio will benefit greatly from these new funds.
Ohio is a leader in school choice.
Ohio has 5 private school choice programs that serve over 30,000 students, and 384 charter schools serving 123,844 students.
But the $20 billion is only the beginning.
As President, I will establish the national goal of providing school choice to every American child living in poverty.
That means that we want every disadvantaged child to be able to choose the local public, private, charter or magnet school that is best for them and their family.
Each state will develop its own formula, but we want the dollars to follow the student.
9 in 10 dollars spent on K-12 education is spent at the state and local level.
To achieve this long-term goal, we will have to make this a shared national mission ... to bring hope to every child in every city in this land.
I will use the pulpit of the presidency to campaign for this in all 50 states, and I will call upon the American people to elect officials at the city, state and federal level who support school choice.
My Administration will partner with the leadership of any inner city in America ... Chicago, Baltimore, Detroit ... that is willing to run a pilot program to provide school choice to every child in that community.
In Baltimore, for instance, that would mean more than $15,000 funds available per student.
I am confident that the politicians will not be able to suppress the will of the people anymore.
If we can put a man on the moon, dig out the Panama Canal, and win two World Wars, then I have no doubt that we, as a nation, can provide school choice to every disadvantaged child in America.
If the states collectively contribute another $110 billion of their own education budgets toward school choice, on top of the $20 billion in federal dollars, that could provide $12,000 in school choice funds to every K-12 student who today lives in poverty.
The money will follow the student.
That means the student will be able to attend the public, private, charter or magnet school of their choice ... and each state will develop its own system that works best for them.
As your President, I will be the nation's biggest cheerleader for school choice.
I understand many stale old politicians will resist.
But it's time for our country to start thinking big once again.
We spend too much time quibbling over the smallest words, when we should spend our time dreaming about the great adventures that lie ahead.
I will also support merit-pay for teachers, so that we reward great teachers ... instead of the failed tenure system that rewards bad teachers and punishes good ones.
At the same time, we have to ensure that jobs are waiting for our young kids when they graduate high school and college.
My policies will add millions of new jobs to our country, especially for our African-American and Hispanic communities.
My plan to lift restrictions on the production of American energy will not only make home energy bills cheaper, but it will add an estimated half a million jobs per year.
By reducing radical regulation and over-taxation, we can bring thousands of new companies into our poorest communities.
Crucially, my trade reforms will create a manufacturing revival in America.
We have a nearly $800 billion dollar annual trade deficit with the world ... that's money coming straight out of states like Ohio, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Maine, and so many others.
By ending foreign currency manipulation, product dumping, and other predatory trading practices, we will be able to open thousands of new plants and factories across America.
The future is filled with limitless possibilities for our nation, and exciting opportunities for our children.
All we have to do is cut our ties with the failed politics of the past.
We've had a failed foreign policy.
A failed education policy.
A failed economic policy.
And, underneath it all, a failed political system that rewards politicians for how many donors they have ... or how many journalists they know ... not how many Americans they help to live better lives.
But the failures of the past are about to end.
Those failures end beginning on November 8th.
We will have One American Nation.
We will be One American People.
We are fighting to give every child, in every forgotten stretch of this country, the chance to live out their dreams in safety and peace.
That means a safe neighborhood, a quality education, and a secure high-paying job.
This is how we will rebuild our future.
This is how We Will Make America Great Again ... For Everyone.
Thank you.
I thank Commander Dale Barnett, your vice commanders, and your constitutional officers.
You have all done such an incredible job.
The men and women of the American Legion represent the best of America.
Strength, courage, selfless devotion.
Your organization, and its members, have done so much to defend our country, our flag, and to advance the cause of Americanism ... not Globalism.
We are in your debt.
I will never let you down.
Together, we are going to work on so many shared goals.
But I want to begin by discussing one goal that I know is so important to all of you: promoting American pride and patriotism in America's schools.
In A Trump Administration, I plan to work directly with the American Legion to uphold our common values and to help ensure they are taught to America's children.
We want our kids to learn the incredible achievements of America's history, its institutions, and its heroes.
We will stop apologizing for America, and we will start celebrating America.
We will be united by our common culture, values and principles ... becoming One American Nation.
One country, under one constitution, saluting one American Flag.
The flag all of you helped to protect and preserve.
That flag deserves respect, and I will work with American Legion to help to strengthen respect for our flag ... and, by the way, we want young Americans to recite the Pledge of Allegiance.
In addition to teaching respect for the flag, we also have to make sure we give our military the tools they need to defend that flag and to deter violence and aggression from our foreign adversaries.
We will rebuild our depleted military, and pursue a state-of-the-art missile defense.
We will do it based on those three famous words: Peace Through Strength.
We will make sure our soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines have the best equipment, training and tools in the world ... and we will ensure that they have the best medical care in the world, both in service, and when they return home as civilians.
That will require a total reform of the Veterans Administration.
I've laid out a ten-step VA reform plan you can review on my website.
Here are the basics:
I will appoint a Secretary of Veterans Affairs whose personal mission will be to clean up the VA.
The Secretary's sole mandate will be to serve our veterans ... not bureaucrats, not politicians, but veterans.
I am going to use every lawful authority to remove and discipline anyone who fails our veterans or breaches the public trust.
I will appoint a commission to investigate all the wrongdoing at the VA, and then present those findings to Congress as the basis for reforming the entire system.
We are going to ensure every veteran in America gets timely access to top-quality care, including the best care in the world for our female veterans.
The Veterans health system will remain a public system, because it is a public trust.
But never again will we allow any veteran to suffer or die waiting for care.
That means Veterans will have the right to go to a VA facility, or the right to see a private doctor or clinic of their choice ... whatever is fastest and best for the veteran.
The Veteran will be in control.
Should I have the honor of serving as president, we are also going to start facing the world with confidence again.
We are going to uphold the laws of the nation and defend our sovereignty and security ... and our border.
I just came back from a great meeting with the President of Mexico, where I expressed my deep respect for the people of his country, and for the tremendous contributions of Mexican-Americans in our country ... including to our Armed Services.
I want to again thank him for his gracious hospitality, and express my belief that we can work together to accomplish great things for both of our countries.
We agreed in the meeting on the need to stop the illegal flow of guns, drugs, cash and people across the border and to take out the cartels.
We also talked about the importance of working to keep jobs and wealth in our hemisphere.
A more prosperous Mexico means fewer illegal border crossings, and a better market for products made in the United States.
When I am President, I am going to look at every trade deal we have across the world and see what steps must be taken to protect American jobs and create new opportunities for American workers.
We will fight for every last American job.
We're going to show ourselves and the world again what a strong and growing American economy looks like.
We are going to give major tax relief to every worker and small business in this country, bring thousands of new companies and millions of new jobs back to our shores ... and unleash an American Energy Revolution.
We will also be appointing justices who will defend our Constitution.
I will nominate men and women to the court who meet the high standard of Antonin Scalia, judges who have the wisdom and integrity to follow the law and not just make it up.
Above all, these next four years, I will be uncompromising in the defense of the United States and our friends and allies.
We are going to end the era of nation-building, and create a new foreign policy ... joined by our partners in the Middle East ... that is focused on destroying ISIS and Radical Islamic Terrorism.
We will extend the hand of friendship to any nation that will work with us in good faith on this vital mission.
At the same time, we will change our immigration screening procedures to help keep terrorists and extremists out of our country.
That includes stopping the influx of Syrian refugees.
My opponent wants a 550% increase.
I, on the other hand, want to build a safe zone overseas ... and use the money saved to invest in America.
It is time to create a New American Future ... for you, your children, and all American children yet to come.
In this future, we will have an honest government ... and that includes an honest State Department, not Pay-For-Play.
Government access and favors will no longer be for sale, and important email records will no longer be deleted and digitally bleached.
We will also have an efficient and responsible federal budget ... no more waste, no more throwing away taxpayer dollars.
Once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
It will be an inclusive society, one that offers hope and opportunity to every part of this country ... including our inner cities.
We will ensure that every child in this land, including African-American and Hispanic child, is put on the American ladder of success: a good education, and a great job.
We will follow the noble example of our military men and women, working selflessly across all difference races and incomes and backgrounds, to achieve unity and accomplish amazing things.
Ladies and gentlemen of the American Legion, I ask today for the honor of your vote.
Working in unison, we can deliver the real American change our country so desperately needs.
We will make America Strong Again.
We will Make America Proud Again.
We will Make America Safe Again.
We will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God bless.
In 62 days, we are going to win this state ... and we are going to win the White House.
This is our chance to end years of injustice, corruption and betrayal.
This is our chance to solve all of the problems that have gone unsolved for so many years.
For how long have people been saying Washington is broken and controlled by special interests?
This is the year we can finally fix it.
That's because change has to come from outside of our broken and corrupt system.
We will never fix our rigged system by relying on the people who rigged it in the first place.
We will never solve our problems by relying on the politicians who created our problems.
So to every American who has been waiting for real change, your wait is over ... your moment of liberation is at hand.
A vote for Trump is a vote to restore Democracy, to heal our economy, and to bring millions of jobs back into every forgotten stretch of this country.
The change will begin my first day in office.
First, we are going to eliminate every unconstitutional executive order and restore the rule of law to our land.
Then, we are going to begin implementing plans for construction of a wall along our southern border.
This will keep out the violent cartels and gangs, as well as their drugs that are poisoning our youth.
But that's just the beginning.
I am going to ask Congress to send me a bill to repeal and replace Obamacare.
Under Senate rules, that bill can be passed with 51 votes ... meaning a Republican Congress and a Republican President can save Americans from this disaster in a single afternoon.
It's going to be a very busy first day.
I am going to instruct the Department of State to immediately suspend the Syrian refugee resettlement program and develop plans for the construction of a safe zone in the region.
My opponent wants a 550% increase in Syrian refugees.
She is running to be America's Angela Merkel.
I am also going to notify all countries that refuse to take back dangerous illegal immigrants who have committed crimes in this country that they will lose access to our visa programs if they continue to do so.
This is the measure that is called for under current law, and I will enforce it.
The Secretary of State is required to take this action, but Hillary Clinton refused to do so ... resulting in thousands of criminal aliens being released into U.S. communities.
Furthermore, I will direct every agency in government to begin identifying all wasteful job-killing regulations and they are going to be removed ... this will include lifting the restrictions on American energy.
I will also notify our NAFTA partners of my intention to renegotiate the deal, and will withdraw from the TPP before it can be ratified.
We are going to bring these jobs back to North Carolina.
Hillary Clinton supported NAFTA, she supported China's entry into the World Trade Organization, and she supported the TPP.
She just does whatever her donors tell her to do.
In a Trump Administration, we will negotiate trade deals on behalf of American workers ... not on behalf of global corporations.
We will work to ensure farmers in North Carolina have the tools they need to thrive at home and compete on a level playing field in foreign markets ... and that means negotiating fair trade deals that put America First.
Crucially, I am also going to convene my top generals and give them a simple instruction: they will have 30 days to submit to the Oval Office a plan for defeating ISIS.
Any nation who shares in this goal will be our friend in this mission.
For years, we have been caught up in endless wars and conflicts under the leadership of failed politicians and a failed foreign policy establishment in Washington D.C.
The same people who made every wrong decision in Iraq, Afghanistan, Libya, Syria, Egypt, China and Russia are the same people who are advising Hillary Clinton.
I am proud instead to have the support of our warfighting generals, active duty military officers, and top military experts who know how to win ... and know how to keep us out of endless war.
Today, 88 retired U.S. generals and admirals signed a letter of endorsement.
That's one of the biggest differences between me and Hillary Clinton.
She favors what has been called military adventurism ... rushing to invade countries, displacing millions of families, then inviting the refugees into our country ... creating power vacuums filled by terrorist groups like ISIS.
I believe in a foreign policy based on our national interests that focuses on American security and regional stability ... instead of using our military to create Democracies in countries with no Democratic history.
We will work to form partnerships overseas based on a long-term strategy of defeating Radical Islamic Terrorism.
We will first have to reverse the damage inflicted by Hillary Clinton ... her legacy of failure in the Middle East, Russia and Asia has made Americans less safe than ever before.
As part of our plan to avoid and prevent foreign conflicts, we are going to rebuild our depleted military.
This is the ultimate deterrent.
We will be guided by those three famous words: Peace Through Strength.
I will ask Congress to eliminate the sequester and immediately re-invest in our military.
Right now, we have the smallest air force since 1947, the smallest army since 1939, and one of the smallest Navy's since 1917.
Like the Cold War, we also need to fight this battle by collecting intelligence and then protecting our classified secrets.
Hillary Clinton has taught us all how much of a problem we have with cyber-security.
We can't have someone in the Oval Office who doesn't understand the meaning of the word confidential.
The new revelations about Hillary Clinton from the just-released FBI documents make more clear than ever that she fails to meet the minimum standard for running for public office.
If she applied for a low-level job at the State Department today she couldn't even get a security clearance.
Her conduct is disqualifying.
Let's run through what we discovered in those FBI documents.
It's important, and we're hoping Matt Lauer will ask about it on Wednesday night at the Townhall.
It's clear from the FBI report that Hillary Clinton lied about her handling of confidential information.
She repeatedly told the country that she understood the classified system, then she told the FBI she didn't understand that the letter "C" meant confidential in the documents she emailed.
On 39 separate occasions she said she couldn't recall details about her mishandling of classified information, and she couldn't even name one step she took to make sure foreign hackers couldn't get into her server.
Keep in mind, that her insecure emails included emails about the drone program.
It's also clear from the FBI report that Hillary Clinton and her top aides knowingly destroyed evidence and covered-up their actions.
After her private server was revealed last March, her staff deleted all the emails and wiped it clean using a software designed to prevent any recovery, called BleachBit.
They used hammers to destroy phones so they couldn't be turned over later ... and by the way, who uses 12 different phones in 4 years?
The only people who use that many phones are usually involved in very, very shady activity.
People who have nothing to hide don't smash phones with hammers.
People who have nothing to hide don't bleach their emails, or destroy evidence to keep it from being publicly archived as required under federal law.
Hillary Clinton failed to turn over thousands of documents, then tried to shield her criminal conduct by having her chief-of-staff declare herself to be Hillary Clinton's private attorney.
Hillary and her top aides told the FBI and others in related lawsuits that they couldn't recall or remember key facts hundreds of different times ... and that's in addition to the guy who set up the server pleading the 5th.
No one takes all the risks Hillary Clinton took unless they are trying to cover up massive crimes.
Hillary Clinton was using the State Department to dole out special favors and access to her friends and donors.
It's called pay-for-play.
One example of pay-for-play is what the Clinton's did in Haiti.
Let me stop here for a second and say how much we love and appreciate the Haitian-American community in Florida and across our country.
We send our prayers to the many still suffering in Haiti from the earthquake.
But while Haiti has suffered, the Clintons and their pals have cashed in.
Bill and Hillary's brothers have signed housing deals in Haiti, and one wound up on the board of a gold mining company.
Clinton Foundation donors have seen the Clintons pave the way for their investments.
In one deal, Hillary Clinton set aside environmental and labor rules to help a South Korean company with a record of violating workers' rights set up what amounts to a sweat shop in Haiti.
The facility has produced only a fraction of the jobs it promised and faces reports of wage theft.
People are asking: where did all the money go?
This November, it is up to the American people to stop the Clintons from raiding America the way they have raided so many other people and places.
One of the groups in America that have been harmed the most by Hillary Clinton's policies are African-Americans.
She sees them only as votes, not as people worthy of a better future.
Many African-Americans have succeeded so greatly in this country, we will honor and protect their achievements.
That includes lowering taxes for our small business owners to fifteen percent.
But millions of African-Americans in our inner cities remain trapped in poverty, joblessness and failing schools.
The Democratic Party has run the inner cities for fifty, sixty, seventy years and more.
4 in 10 African-American children in poverty, including 45% of those under the age of six.
58% of African-American youth are not working.
2,900 people have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year.
Nationwide, African-Americans are nearly 60% of the murder victims under the age of 22.
This is a national crisis ... and anybody who fails to understand that is not fit to seek the Presidency of the United States.
To those suffering in crime and poverty, I say: give Donald J. Trump a chance.
What do you have to lose by embracing our platform of change?
We are going to bring back your jobs, rebuild your cities, and give parents and students school choice.
I will never, ever, ever take you for granted.
We are going to push a new Civil Rights agenda.
We believe every American has the right to a safe community, a great education and government that protects their jobs.
This weekend, I had the honor to join a church service in Detroit at the Great Faith Ministries International with the amazing Bishop Wayne Jackson.
It was an incredible and deeply moving experience.
I will fight for Detroit, for Chicago, for Baltimore, and for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as One American People.
Let me quote the same passage from the Bible I read on Saturday, from 1 John 4: "No one has ever seen God; but, if we love one another, God lives in us and his love is made complete in us."
Imagine what we our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One Flag.
It is time to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a New American Future.
In this future, we will respect the dignity of all Americans ... and that means great jobs, great schools, and great neighborhoods.
We will keep our children safe ... which requires secure borders, a strong military, and supporting law enforcement.
Jobs will return, prosperity will rise, and new factories will come rushing back to our shores.
Government corruption will end ... and the State Department will answer to the voters, not Hillary Clinton's donors.
Republicans are the Party of Abraham Lincoln and, come November 8th, we will once again have a government of, by and for the people.
We Will Make America Proud Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
Come November, we are going to win this state, we are going to win the White House ... and we are going to bring back your jobs.
We are going to negotiate fair trade deals that put American workers first.
We are going to stop the product dumping, the unfair foreign subsidies, and the currency manipulation.
We are going to stop the foreign cheating.
The era of economic surrender is over.
A new era of American Greatness is beginning.
No state has been hurt worse by the Hillary Clinton trade policies than Ohio.
Hillary Clinton backed her husband's NAFTA, she backed China's entrance into the World Trade Organization, she backed the job-killing trade deal with South Korea, and backed the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
One bad deal after another.
Hillary Clinton's donors own her, and she will do whatever they tell her to do.
Ohio has lost nearly 1 in 3 manufacturing jobs since NAFTA, and nearly 1 in 4 manufacturing jobs since China entered the World Trade Organization.
Our trade deficit in goods with the world is now nearly $800 billion dollars.
This subtracts directly from our growth ... our economy grew only 1.1 percent in the last quarter, a total disaster.
This is the legacy of Hillary Clinton.
I am promising a new legacy for America.
We are going to create a New American Future.
But to do that, we have to stop the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Our trade deficit with the proposed TPP member countries cost the state of Ohio more than 100,000 manufacturing jobs last year.
Imagine how many more jobs would be lost if TPP was actually approved.
Hillary Clinton, who called the TPP the "Gold Standard", would 100% approve it if she ever got in.
We won't let that happen.
We will win this election, and we will keep America out of the TPP.
We will defend our freedom, our jobs, and our economic independence.
It's going to be America First.
My economic plan is going to grow this economy, raise your wages, and create millions of new jobs.
Here are a few of the things we will do:
A massive tax cut for working Americans.
We are going to eliminate regulations that kill American jobs, and that includes getting rid of the Obama Administration's new anti-energy rules that will raise Ohio energy bills by more than 40 percent.
Hillary Clinton says she wants to "put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business."
Just like she wants to put the steel workers out of business.
We are going to put the miners and the steel workers back to work ... and we are going to get your energy bills down.
We are going to repeal and replace Obamacare, saving another 2 million jobs over the next decade.
We are going to create jobs for all of our people, and we are going to fight to ensure that every young African-American and Latino child is put on the ladder of American success: a good education, and a great job.
Another major part of our agenda is immigration security.
We need to protect American jobs.
We need to protect American safety.
Last night, I outlined a detailed plan to provide jobs, safety and security to the American people with bold new immigration reforms.
I had a great meeting yesterday with the President of Mexico where we both expressed our shared desire to secure the border, put the cartels out of business, and to keep jobs in our hemisphere.
Let's also talk about government corruption.
No issue better illustrates how corrupt my opponent is than her pay-for-play scandals as Secretary of State.
Here is one example of Clinton Corruption.
As Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton signed off on a deal allowing Russians to take an increased stake in a company called Uranium One, giving up control of about 20 percent of America's uranium supply to the Russians.
Clinton's approval of the deal netted the owners of the uranium company millions of dollars.
In exchange for signing off on the deal, some of the former owners of Uranium One gave the Clinton Foundation millions of dollars in donations.
In addition, Bill Clinton received $500,000 for a speech to a Kremlin-backed investment firm that was a beneficiary of the deal.
Here is another example of pay-for-play.
In 2009, Ericsson telecommunications came under U.S. pressure for selling telecom equipment to several oppressive governments ... including Sudan, Syria, and Iran.
Some these regimes used those technologies to monitor and control their own people.
In June 2011, Hillary Clinton's state department began adding goods and service to a list that might be covered under expanded sanctions on Iran and other state sponsors of terrorism.
During that time, Ericsson sponsored a speech by Bill Clinton, paying him $750,000 ... his highest paying speech.
In April 2012, the Obama Administration issued an executive order imposing sanctions on telecom sales to Iran and Syria ...but those sanctions did not cover Ericsson's work in Iran.
A Trump Administration will end the government corruption.
No one will be above the law.
We will have one set of rules for everyone.
In Hillary Clinton's world, we have one set of rules for her ... and another set of rules for everyone else.
I am fighting for everyone who doesn't have a voice.
The forgotten men and women of America.
I am your voice.
Hillary Clinton's campaign is funded by Wall Street and hedge fund managers.
My campaign is powered by my own money, but also by small dollar donations from working people across this country who want their country back.
Nothing terrifies the ruling class more than when everyday working people give 5, 10, or 15 dollars to our campaign to help us take government away from the special interests and give it back to the voters.
Come November 8th, we are once again going to have a government that serves you, your family, and your country.
We are going to rebuild our depleted military, avoid needless foreign wars, build new friendships overseas, and remember those three famous words: Peace Through Strength.
We are going to work with our allies to crush, defeat, and utterly destroy ISIS.
We are going to have a new immigration screening test to keep people out of our country who don't support our tolerant values.
My tax reforms will add millions of new jobs and thousands of new small businesses.
My energy reforms will create millions of new jobs and lower the prince of your energy bill.
My trade reforms will raise wages, grow jobs and add trillions in new wealth into our country.
My immigration reforms will protect your jobs and stop businesses from exploiting visas programs that hurt poor workers.
My infrastructure plans will rebuild your roads, bridges and airports.
My regulatory reforms will make it easier for African-Americans small businesses to thrive, and for young children to live out their dreams.
My promise of school choice, charter schools and merit-pay for teachers will help low-income students in our inner cities.
Hillary Clinton discriminates against poor African-American children by opposing school choice.
My government reforms will make your voice heard ... not the voice of the special interests.
Every insider, getting rich off of our broken system, is throwing money at Hillary Clinton.
It's the powerful protecting the powerful.
Insiders fighting for insiders.
I am fighting for you.
Every day you turn on the nightly news, you hear about how some self-interested banker or some Washington insider says they oppose our campaign.
Or some encrusted old politician says they oppose our campaign.
Or some big time lobbyist says they oppose our campaign.
I wear their opposition as a badge of honor.
Because it means I am fighting for REAL change, not just partisan change.
I am fighting ... all of us across the country are fighting ... for peaceful regime change in our own country.
The media-donor-political complex that's bled this country dry has to be replaced with a new government of, by and for the people.
I will fight to ensure that every American is treated equally, protected equally, and honored equally.
We will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms, and seek a new future of security, prosperity and opportunity ... a future built on our common culture and values as one American people.
I am asking for your vote so I can be your champion in the White House.
To every parent who dreams for their children, and to every child who dreams for their future, I say these words to you tonight: I'm with you, I will fight for you, and I will win for you.
Together, We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make American Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless.
We are doing so well in Iowa, a recent Reuters poll had us up by 10 points.
On November 8, we are going to win this state and we are going to win the White House.
It's going to be a victory for YOU, the American people.
We are going to take on the special interests, the lobbyists, and the corrupt corporate media that have rigged the system against everyday Americans.
We are going to create a new government that serves you, your family, and your country.
Lower taxes, less regulation, more affordable childcare, fair trade deals, secure borders, thriving family farms, and millions and millions of new jobs.
We are going to end the Clinton Corruption and restore dignity and honesty to government service.
Hillary Clinton is an insider fighting only for insiders.
I am an outsider fighting for you.
Everything you need to know about Hillary Clinton can be understood with this simple phrase: Follow The Money.
In her campaign for President, Hillary Clinton has received $100 million dollars in contributions from Wall Street and the hedge funds.
She received $4.1 million in speaking fees from financial firms.
The same groups paying Bill and Hillary for their speeches were lobbying the federal government.
Twenty-two groups paying Bill Clinton for speeches lobbied the State Department while Hillary was Secretary of State.
And don't forget the Clinton contributors were appointed to advisory boards by Secretary Clinton ... or all the favors and access granted to those who wrote checks.
She even gave up 20% of American Uranium to Russia.
She disgraced the office of Secretary of State by putting it up for sale - and if she ever got the chance, she'd put the Oval Office up for sale too.
We can't let that happen.
That's why you have to go out and vote on November 8th, and early voting in Iowa starts tomorrow.
She deleted and bleached 33,000 emails after a Congressional subpoena.
13 phones missing, several destroyed with a hammer.
Her staffers taking the fifth amendment, and her ringleaders getting immunity deals.
Foreign enemies with easy access to hack her server.
Lies to Congress, under oath, about turning over her work-related emails.
The Clintons have perfected the politics of profit.
The large corporations who support terrible trade deals that offshore jobs ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
The Wall Street investors who have rigged the regulations against the middle class ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
The wealthy donors who want to shut down American energy ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
The special interests who want open borders are donating to Hillary Clinton.
That's why Hillary Clinton is pushing for a 550% increase in Syrian refugees.
She and her financial backers will say anything, do anything, lie about anything to keep their grip on power ... to keep their control over this country.
The American people have had it with corrupt Clinton ways.
They are tired of the lies, they are tired of the trivial politics, they are tired of being talked down to, looked down upon, and treated like second class citizens.
How many more Clinton scandals can this country take - one after another after another?
They are the sordid past.
We are the bright future.
While our campaign outlines big changes and bold solutions to make your life better, the Clinton campaign focuses only on small and petty distractions.
Never in American history have so many serious challenges been met with so unserious a campaign as the campaign of Hillary Clinton.
This will be the year the American people say: Enough is enough.
It's time for real change ... a new foreign policy, a new economic policy, a new immigration policy, a new trade policy.
Hillary Clinton has been a disaster for so many communities, but especially for African-American communities.
I don't think African-Americans are going to come out and vote for Clinton ... they are too smart, and they know they are being used.
They also know that she'll do nothing for them once the election is over ... she never does, and that will never change.
Many of them will never forget her calling young African-American men "super-predators."
Same thing goes for Hispanic voters ... they are tired of being used by people like Hillary Clinton, that have no intention of doing anything for them once the election is over.
Hillary Clinton is a vessel for the special interests trying to strip this country of its wealth, its jobs, and its status as a sovereign nation.
She is a globalist who has made a career taking jobs from our country and giving them to other countries.
I am not running to be President of the World.
I am running to be President of the United States of America.
From now on, it's going to be America First.
Have you ever wondered why it is that all things that the American people want never seem to happen?
Why can't we have the schools we want, and the borders we want, and the security we want?
Why can't we have policies that support small business, or family farms, or the miners and the steelworkers?
The answer is simple.
Because the financial interests who control our politics and our media don't want these changes to happen.
These special interests control Hillary Clinton.
She is their chosen representative.
You can disregard everything she says and just remember this phrase: Follow The Money.
She's there for only one reason, to protect her donors.
Look at her career.
She's been there for 30 years, and has never done anything for you and your family.
She's failed at everything.
She failed in Iraq, in Libya, in Syria, in Iran, in Egypt.
She failed on Russia, on China, on North Korea.
She failed upstate New York.
She failed the inner cities.
She's failed women and children.
I've created thousands of jobs for women in this country, of incredible talent.
Hillary Clinton has been in Washington for 30 years and now 70 million American women and children are in poverty or on the brink of poverty.
And she has been a disaster on our borders.
I'd like to invite on up here Michelle Root, the mother of Sarah Root, who was killed by an illegal immigrant released into the country under the Obama catch-and-release policies championed by Hillary Clinton.
Hillary Clinton supports Sanctuary Cities.
Where was the Sanctuary for Sarah?
The only people Hillary Clinton has ever delivered for are her donors.
Just Follow The Money.
Her single greatest achievement may be getting away with her massive e-mail scandal and criminal cover-up.
Our campaign is taking on big business, big media and big donors ... we're taking them on for YOU.
So you can have the future you want.
That includes keeping your family safe.
New FBI statistics shows that homicide rose 15% last year in America's large cities, and that it's the largest single-year increase in 45 years.
More than 3,000 people have been shot in Chicago since January.
60% of murder victims under the age of 22 in this country are African-American.
45% of African-American children under the age of 6 are living in poverty.
I will never back down from fighting to save American lives.
I will never back down from fighting to create safety and wealth for our inner cities.
My economic agenda can be summed up in three very beautiful words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
We will cut your taxes, reduce regulations ... including on our farmers ... negotiate great trade deals, unleash American energy and we are going to repeal and replace Obamacare.
We are also going to end common core and offer school choice to every disadvantaged child ... including every poor Hispanic and African-American child in America.
The people getting rich off the rigged system are the people throwing their money at Hillary Clinton.
Remember: Follow the Money.
Our campaign is about breaking-up the special interest monopoly in Washington, D.C. We're trying to disrupt the collusion between the wealthy donors, the large corporations, and the media executives.
They're all part of the same political establishment.
They go to the same restaurants, they attend the same conferences, they have the same friends and connections.
And they nod along when Hillary Clinton slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable.
I call you hardworking American Patriots and together we are going to save this country.
Government will start working again.
Fixing things is what I do.
Just look at my projects in New York, and around the world, where I revitalized neighborhoods and lifted up skylines.
An article in the New York Post was published recently called "How Donald Trump helped save New York City."
The article said, quote: "Trump waded into a landscape of empty Fifth Avenue storefronts, the dust-bowl mugging ground that was Central Park and a Wall Street area seemingly on its last legs as companies moved out... Trump ... almost by force of will ... rode to the rescue.
Expressing rare faith in the future, he was instrumental in kick-starting the regeneration of neighborhoods and landmarks almost given up for dead."
That's what I want to do for our country ...
I want to go into the neglected neighborhoods, the failing schools, the forgotten stretches of this nation, and unlock their potential for all of our people.
Together, we can accomplish anything we want.
But that means you need to show up and vote on November 8th ... and it means you need to start voting early.
Early voting is so important.
You have to knock on doors.
You have to pick up that phone.
You have to campaign on the streets.
Spread the love that we have in this room to the people of our country.
To beat the system, you have to lift your voice, pound the pavement, and get out the vote.
Visit our website to find out how you can help.
You have six weeks until the election.
You have six weeks to make every dream you ever dreamed for your country come true.
You have one magnificent chance to deliver justice for every forgotten man, woman and child in this nation.
The arrogance of Washington, D.C. will soon come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter.
This November 8th, we are going to show the whole world that America is Back ...
Bigger and Better and Stronger than Ever Before.
Here is just some of what will happen starting in January of 2017:
I am going to lower your taxes; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; repeal and replace Obamacare; unleash American energy; end illegal immigration; keep Radical Islamic terrorists out of our country; save the 2nd amendment; support the men and women of law enforcement; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
We will rebuild our roads, bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools and hospitals.
American cars will travel the roads, American planes will soar in the skies, and American ships will patrol the seas.
American steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds.
American hands will rebuild this nation ... and American energy, harvested from American sources, will power this nation.
American workers will be hired to do the job.
We will put new American steel into the spine of this country.
I will fight for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
It is time to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a new, inclusive and prosperous American future.
Once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
A recent Reuters poll had us tied in Wisconsin, and we were just in Iowa where we are up by 10 in the Reuters poll ... and a new post-debate Google poll has leading Hillary Clinton by 2 points nationwide, and that's despite the fact that they were suppressing bad news about Hillary Clinton.
On November 8th, we are going to win this state and we are going to win the White House.
It's going to be a victory for YOU, the American people.
We are going to end the Clinton Corruption and restore dignity and honesty to government service.
Hillary Clinton is an insider who fights only for her donors and for herself.
I am an outsider fighting for you.
One of the first things we are going to do is restore law and order to this country.
Our good friend, Sheriff Clarke, is here with us tonight.
New FBI statistics shows that homicide rose 15% last year in America's large cities, and that it's the largest single-year increase in 45 years.
More than 3,000 people have been shot in Chicago since January.
Homicides are up nearly 50% in Washington D.C. and more than 60% in Baltimore.
Across the entire nation, for cities of all sizes, small and large, the homicide rates rose by more than 10% last year.
This is a national crisis.
Yet, my opponent, Hillary Clinton, continues to attack the police.
First, she calls our supporters ... many of them cops, soldiers and firefighters ... deplorable and irredeemable.
Then, in our debate this week, she accusses the entire country, including all of law enforcement, of "implicit bias," ... essentially suggesting that everyone, including our police, are basically racist and prejudiced.
Maybe Hillary Clinton should confine her comments to herself.
After all, she is the one who described young African-American men as "super-predators."
How can Hillary Clinton try to lead this country when she has such a low opinion of its citizens?
How can she lead a country when she thinks America is full of racists, deplorables and irredeemables?
By smearing tens of millions of hardworking, decent Americans she has rendered herself unfit to be President.
She has nothing but hostility in her heart for hardworking Americans, of all backgrounds, who just want to live in safety, security and peace.
The police officers she attacks are the same people ... of all colors and nationalities ... who race into danger every day to save the lives of complete strangers.
Those fostering the dangerous anti-police atmosphere in this country share directly in the blame for the violence and chaos that threatens our most vulnerable citizens.
My agenda of reducing crime will benefit all Americans, but those who will benefit most are African-American and Hispanic-American citizens living in high crime communities.
We are going to save thousands of lives.
The special interests, the arrogant media, and the political insiders, don't want me to talk about the crime that is happening in our country and in our inner cities.
They don't want you to know about the hurt and pain that is happening to our fellow citizens.
They just want me to just go along with the same failed policies that have caused so much needless suffering and so much preventable heartache.
Well, I have news for the people trying to silence me and trying to silence all of us.
I will never back down from fighting to save American lives.
I will never back down from fighting to save America's inner cities.
The only people Hillary Clinton ever fights for are the special interests who write her checks.
Follow The Money.
Hillary Clinton has been a disaster for so many communities, but especially for African-American communities.
I don't think African-Americans are going to come out and vote for Clinton ... they are too smart, and they know they are being used.
They also know that she'll do nothing for them once the election is over ... she never does, and that will never change.
Same thing goes for Hispanic voters ... they are tired of being used by people like Hillary Clinton, that have no intention of doing anything for them once the election is over.
58% of African-American youth don't have jobs.
There is another shooting in Chicago every 2 hours.
45% of African-American children under the age of six are living in poverty.
The inner cities have been left behind.
Crime is through the roof, public education is a disaster, there are no jobs, it's dangerous to walk down the street with your child.
To the African-American community, I say: what do you have to lose?
Vote for Donald Trump, I will fix it.
I will fight for you harder than anyone has ever fought for you before.
Everything you need to know about Hillary Clinton can be understood with this simple phrase: Follow The Money.
The large corporations who support terrible trade deals that offshore jobs ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Follow The Money.
The Wall Street investors who have rigged the regulations against the middle class ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Follow The Money.
The wealthy donors who want to shut down American energy ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Follow The Money.
The special interests who want open borders, for cheap labor, are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Follow The Money.
She and her financial backers will say anything, do anything, lie about anything to keep their grip on power ... to keep their control over this country.
In her campaign for President, Hillary Clinton has received $100 million dollars in contributions from Wall Street and the hedge funds.
She received $4.1 million in speaking fees from financial firms.
She and Bill received a total of $150 million in speaking fees from special interests since Bill left office.
It's all part of the rigged system being run at your expense.
The same groups paying Bill and Hillary for their speeches were lobbying the federal government.
Twenty-two groups paying Bill Clinton for speeches lobbied the State Department while Hillary was Secretary of State.
And don't forget the Clinton contributors were appointed to advisory boards by Secretary Clinton ... or all the favors and access granted to those who provided funds.
She even gave up 20% of America's uranium supply to Russia.
She put the office of Secretary of State up for sale ... and if she ever got the chance, she'd put the Oval Office up for sale too.
She deleted and bleached 33,000 emails after a Congressional subpoena.
13 phones missing, several destroyed with a hammer.
Her staffers taking the fifth amendment, and her ringleaders getting immunity deals.
Foreign enemies with easy access to hack her server.
Lies to Congress, under oath, about turning over her work-related emails.
The American people have had it with years, decades, of the Clintons' scandals and corruption.
This will be the year the American people said: Enough is enough.
Hillary Clinton is a vessel for the special interests trying to strip this country of its wealth, its jobs, and its status as a sovereign nation.
She is a globalist who has made a career taking jobs from our country and giving them to other countries.
I am not running to be President of the World.
I am running to be President of the United States of America.
From now on, it's going to be America First.
These special interests control Hillary Clinton.
She is their chosen representative.
You can disregard everything she says and just remember this phrase: Follow The Money.
She's there for only one reason, to protect her donors and collect their money.
Look at her career.
She's been there for 30 years, and has never done anything for you and your family.
She's failed at everything.
She failed in Iraq, in Libya, in Syria, in Iran, in Egypt.
She failed on ISIS ... in fact, she unleashed ISIS onto the world.
She failed upstate New York ... promising 200,000 jobs, but instead the jobs left.
All she did was name a post office and a highway.
She failed the inner cities.
She's failed women and children.
The only people Hillary Clinton has ever delivered for are her donors.
Our campaign is taking on big business, big media and big donors ... we're taking them on for YOU.
So you can have the future you want.
I'm not owned or controlled by anyone ... my loyalty is to you, and no one else.
I WILL FIGHT FOR YOU.
My economic agenda can be summed up in three very beautiful words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
We will cut your taxes, reduce regulations, negotiate great trade deals, unleash American energy and we are going to repeal and replace Obamacare.
We are also going to end common core and offer school choice to every disadvantaged child ... including every poor Hispanic and African-American child in America.
We will put every American kid on the ladder of American success: a great education, and a great job.
The people getting rich off the rigged system are the people throwing their money at Hillary Clinton.
Follow the Money.
Our campaign is about breaking-up the special interest monopoly in Washington, D.C. We're trying to disrupt the collusion between the wealthy donors, the large corporations, and the media executives.
They're all part of the same rigged political establishment.
They go to the same restaurants, they attend the same conferences, they have the same friends and connections.
And they are all in for a big day of reckoning on November 8th.
Government will start working for you again.
Fixing things is what I do.
Just look at my projects in New York, and around the world, where I revitalized neighborhoods and lifted up skylines.
That's what I want to do for our country ...
I want to go into every neighborhood and unlock their potential for all of our people.
Together, we can accomplish anything we want.
But that means you need to show up and vote on November 8th ... and it means you need to start voting early.
Early voting is already underway.
You have to knock on doors.
You have to pick up that phone.
You have to campaign on the streets.
Spread the love that we have in this room to the people of our country.
To beat the system, you have to lift your voice, pound the pavement, and get out the vote.
Visit our website to find out how you can help.
You have six weeks until the election.
You have six weeks to make every dream you ever dreamed for your country come true.
You have one last magnificent chance to deliver justice for every forgotten man, woman and child in this nation.
Don't let it slip away.
Don't let this chance go.
Stand up and be heard ... for your family, for your city, for your country.
The arrogance of Washington, D.C. will soon come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter.
This November 8th, we are going to show the whole world that America is Back ...
Bigger and Better and Stronger than Ever Before.
Here is just some of what will happen starting in January of 2017:
I am going to lower your taxes; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; repeal and replace Obamacare; unleash American energy; end illegal immigration; keep Radical Islamic terrorists out of our country; save the 2nd amendment; support the men and women of law enforcement; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
We will rebuild our roads, bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools and hospitals.
American cars will travel the roads, American planes will soar in the skies, and American ships will patrol the seas.
American steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds.
American hands will rebuild this nation ... and American energy, harvested from American sources, will power this nation.
American workers will be hired to do the job.
We will put new American steel into the spine of this country.
I will fight for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
It is time to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a new, inclusive and prosperous American future.
Once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
I've come to know and love the people of New Hampshire.
You are strong, independent and you are free.
We are all going to work very hard together over the next 40 days, and we are going to win this state, we are going to win the White House.
We are going to take on the special interests, the lobbyists, and the corrupt corporate media that have rigged the system against everyday Americans.
We are going to create millions of new jobs for our people, trillions in new wealth for our communities, and rising wages for every working American.
We are going to create a new government that serves you, your family, and your country.
We are going to end the Clinton Corruption and restore dignity and honesty to government service.
Hillary Clinton is an insider fighting only for herself and for her donors.
I am an outsider fighting for you.
Everything you need to know about Hillary Clinton can be understood with this simple but very important phrase: Follow The Money.
The large corporations who support terrible trade deals that offshore jobs ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Follow the money.
The Wall Street investors who have rigged the regulations against the middle class ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Follow the money.
The wealthy donors who want to shut down American energy ... they are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Follow the money.
The special interests who want open borders are donating to Hillary Clinton.
Again, just follow the money.
In her campaign for President, Hillary Clinton has received $100 million dollars in contributions from Wall Street and the hedge funds.
She and Bill were paid $150 million for speeches since Bill left the Oval Office.
The same groups paying Bill and Hillary for their speeches were lobbying the federal government.
Twenty-two groups paying Bill Clinton for speeches lobbied the State Department while Hillary was Secretary of State.
Favors and access were granted to those who wrote checks.
She put the office of Secretary of State up for sale ... and if she ever got the chance, she'd put the Oval Office up for sale too.
She deleted and bleached 33,000 emails after a Congressional subpoena.
13 phones missing, several destroyed with a hammer.
Her staffers taking the fifth amendment, and her ringleaders getting immunity deals.
We're going to call them the FBI Immunity 5.
Foreign enemies with easy access to hack her server.
Lies to Congress, under oath, about turning over her work-related emails.
She and her financial backers will say anything, do anything, lie about anything to keep their grip on power ... to keep their control over this country.
The American people have had it with years, decades, of Clinton Corruption and scandals.
They are tired of the lies, they are tired of the trivial politics, they are tired of being talked down to, looked down upon, and treated like second class citizens.
The Clintons are the sordid past.
We are the bright future.
While our campaign outlines big changes and bold solutions to make your life better, the Clinton campaign focuses only on small and petty distractions.
This will be the year the American people say: Enough is enough.
Hillary Clinton has been a disaster for so many communities, but especially for African-American communities.
I don't think African-Americans are going to come out and vote for Clinton ... they are too smart, and they know they are being used.
They also know that she'll do nothing for them once the election is over ... she never does, and that will never change.
Many of them will never forget her calling young African-American men "super-predators."
Same thing goes for Hispanic voters ... they are tired of being used by people like Hillary Clinton, that have no intention of doing anything for them once the election is over.
A Trump Administration will bring prosperity to all of our people.
My economic agenda can be summed up with three very beautiful words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
We are going to pass the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan, and we are going to lower the business rate from 35% to 15% -- making America into a magnet for new jobs.
Every wasteful and unnecessary regulation will be eliminated, along with every illegal executive order.
We will unleash the power of American energy ... we are sitting on $50 trillion dollars in untapped energy reserves, and we are going to put that wealth into the pockets of the American people.
Common core will be ended, and disadvantaged children will be allowed to attend the school of their choice.
The catastrophe known as Obamacare will be repealed and replaced.
And the disastrous trade deals, like NAFTA, that have caused so much pain in New Hampshire, will be renegotiated.
NAFTA was signed by Bill Clinton, and supported by Hillary Clinton ... and your state has lost 1 in 3 manufacturing jobs since it was approved.
You've lost 1 in 4 since China entered the World Trade Organization ... another Bill and Hillary-backed deal.
Hillary Clinton has been on the wrong side of every major trade deal in her career and, if she gets the chance, she would approve the Trans-Pacific Partnership ... which would destroy manufacturing in this state.
Hillary Clinton is merely a vessel for the special interests trying to strip this country of its wealth, its jobs, and its status as a sovereign nation.
She is a globalist who has made a career taking jobs from our country and giving them to other countries.
I am not running to be President of the World.
I am running to be President of the United States of America.
From now on, it's going to be America First.
Have you ever wondered why it is that all things that the American people want never seem to happen?
Think about it.
For how many years have the American people asked for our tax code to be fixed?
Or for our infrastructure to be repaired?
Or for the waste to be removed from the budget?
For how many years have voters pleaded for secure borders, fair trade deals, and quality schools that serve parents and students?
All the things you've ever wanted for your country have been denied.
The reason for this is simple.
It's because the financial interests who control our politics and our media don't want these changes to happen.
These special interests control Hillary Clinton.
She is their chosen representative.
She's been there for 30 years, and has never done anything for you and your family.
She's there for only one reason, to protect her donors and collect their money.
Our campaign is taking on big business, big media and big donors ... we're taking them on for YOU.
So you can have the future you want.
That includes keeping your family safe.
New FBI statistics shows that homicide rose 15% last year in America's large cities, and that it's the largest single-year increase in 45 years.
More than 3,000 people have been shot in Chicago since January.
The failed politicians and the arrogant media don't want me to talk about the crime and the violence that is happening in our country.
They just want me to go along with the status quo.
Well, I have news for the people trying to silence me, and trying to silence all of us.
We will never back down from fighting to save American lives.
That also means keeping our nation safe from Radical Islamic Terrorism.
Hillary Clinton can't even say the words.
We are also going to keep our country safe from drugs.
New Hampshire has suffered so greatly from the heroin crisis and the drugs pouring across our border.
The rate of heroin overdoses has nearly quadrupled ... once again, our politicians have tragically failed this country and its people.
I am going to stop the drugs from pouring across our border ... that is a promise.
The people getting rich off the rigged system are the people throwing their money at Hillary Clinton.
Our campaign is about breaking-up the special interest monopoly in Washington, D.C. We're trying to disrupt the collusion between the wealthy donors, the large corporations, and the media executives.
They're all part of the same corrupt political establishment.
And they nod along when Hillary Clinton slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable.
I call you hardworking American Patriots and together we are going to save this country.
Together, we can accomplish anything we want.
But that means you need to show up and vote on November 8th.
You have to knock on doors.
You have to pick up that phone.
You have to campaign on the streets.
Spread the love that we have in this room to the people of our country.
To beat the system, you have to lift your voice, pound the pavement, and get out the vote.
Visit our website to find out how you can help.
You have 40 days until the election.
You have 40 days to make every dream you ever dreamed for your country come true.
Do Not Let This Chance Slip Away.
You have one magnificent chance to deliver justice for every forgotten man, woman and child in this nation.
The arrogance of Washington, D.C. will soon come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter.
On November 8th, we are going to show the whole world that America is Back ...
Bigger and Better and Stronger than ever before.
Here is just some of the great things that will happen for your country:
We are going to lower your taxes; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; repeal and replace job-killing Obamacare; make childcare more affordable; bring back our manufacturing jobs; keep Radical Islamic terrorists out of our country; save the 2nd amendment; support the men and women of law enforcement; and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
We will rebuild our roads, bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools and hospitals.
American cars will travel the roads, American planes will soar in the skies, and American ships will patrol the seas.
American steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds.
American hands will rebuild this nation ... and American energy, harvested from American sources, will power this nation.
American workers will be hired to do the job.
We will put new American steel into the spine of this country.
I will fight for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as Americans.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
It is time to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a new, inclusive and prosperous American future.
Once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
Tremendous polls keep coming in.
A brand new Rasmussen poll has us up 5 points nationwide.
On November 8th, we are going to win this state and we are going to win the White House.
We are going to take on the big donors, and big business, and big media ... we are going to take on the rigged system that has shipped America's wealth to other countries.
We are going to replace our failed and corrupt establishment with a new government that serves you, your family, and your country.
My economic agenda can be summed up in three very beautiful words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
We will cut taxes for all working and middle-class households in America.
We will reduce regulations, which will put more money into the hands of our poorest workers and bring thousands of new companies to our shores.
We will unleash American energy, creating millions of new jobs and lowering energy costs.
The Obama-Clinton energy restrictions are nothing more than a massive tax on the poor ... we will remove those restrictions day one.
We will repeal and replace disastrous Obamacare.
President Obama promised his plan would reduce premiums by $2,500 dollars.
Instead, they surged $5,000.
Our replacement plan includes expanded access to Healthcare Savings Accounts, with support for those who need it.
It includes allowing Americans to buy health insurance across state lines in all 50 states, creating a dynamic and competitive new market ... they will be competing for your business.
We're also going to block grant Medicaid so states can develop innovative solutions to make sure no citizen in poverty ever falls through the cracks.
High-risk pools will also help to ensure that those with pre-existing conditions will always get the quality coverage they need.
On trade, we are going to end the international abuse, the foreign cheating, and the one-sided rules that govern NAFTA and the World Trade Organization.
Right now, America eliminates its tariffs, but then other countries tax our goods with backdoor tariffs and close their markets.
Our massive, chronic trade deficits are destroying the middle class ... and shifting money away from workers to large corporations who have no borders.
There's a reason hedge funds and Wall Street are giving tens of millions to my opponent.
Hillary Clinton is the voice for the global special interests.
I am running to be the voice of the forgotten men and women.
My opponent likes to say that for decades, she has been "fighting for women."
That she has been "fighting for children."
Why then are 70 million American women and children living in poverty, or on the brink of poverty?
Why has she provided no relief for the millions of Americans in search of affordable, reliable quality childcare?
You know the old saying, "Watch what I do, not what I say."
At the Trump Organization, and in my campaign for President, women occupy some of the highest positions.
I have employed thousands of women in my company.
Women of different backgrounds.
Women of many talents.
And just last week, joined by my daughter, Ivanka, I laid out my plan for childcare and eldercare.
That plan has many great features, including tax-free childcare savings accounts.
Low-income parents are given tax credits they can put straight into those accounts, and then get a $500 dollar per child match for those savings accounts deposits.
Families can also deduct the cost of childcare from their taxes, a huge tax cut for the middle class.
We have also talked about improving education.
My plan includes school choice for every disadvantaged child in America.
We are also going to bring down the cost of college.
Universities get massive federal funds, and huge tax breaks for their endowments ... but then they don't spend those funds or those endowments on their students.
I will work with Congress to make sure these special federal benefits are not available unless universities begin to reduce tuition and student debt.
This will get to the problem at the source, and reduce both the cost for students and the cost for taxpayers.
Our students are drowning and we're going to fix it.
Women also value security.
They want a Commander-in-Chief that will defeat radical Islamic terrorism, stop the massive inflow of refugees, protect our borders, and who will reduce the rising crime and violence in our cities.
As I campaign across this country, I hear so many stories and pleas, from women especially, about drug addiction and opioid use.
They are doing their best in their communities and for their families to provide a safe and nurturing environment.
But even the best-laid plans cannot always protect our youth, and increasingly, many adults, from the scourge of drugs.
We lose thousands of our fellow Americans every year to opioid use.
I will stop the drug inflow from our borders.
These drugs come over the border and make their way into our urban and rural communities, and into our suburbs.
This must change.
Every change starts with a conversation.
Together, we will have this conversation.
And we will make this change.
The changes will start immediately.
Here, in Virginia, we are going to end the war on American energy.
Hillary Clinton says she wants to put the miners out of work.
Clinton and Kaine also want to shut down shale, and shut down natural gas.
The Clinton regulatory agenda will drive up electricity prices for Virginia families and will cost the U.S. economy over $5 trillion.
By the way, less than a week after taking office, Tim Kaine proposed a $4 billion dollar tax hike in Virginia, including on people earning as little as $17,000 dollars a year.
We are going to open up all sources of American energy and bring jobs, wealth, and cheaper electricity to Virginia.
Another major part of our agenda is safety.
I believe every family in America is entitled to live in safety and peace.
Today, the nation just opened the Smithsonian National Museum of African-American History and Culture.
We congratulate and honor those involved with the project, and recognize today the incredible contributions of the African-American community to this nation.
African-Americans have given so much to this nation and sacrificed so much for this nation.
Many African-Americans are succeeding so greatly in our country, and I will make sure their success is protected and supported.
At the same time, too many African-Americans have been left behind and trapped in poverty.
I will fight to make sure every single African-American child in this country is fully included in the American Dream.
That includes the new civil rights issue of our time: School Choice.
Democrats have run the inner cities for half a century or more, and produced only more joblessness and poverty.
The jobs are leaving, the schools are failing, and crime is rising.
To those suffering, I say: Vote for Donald Trump.
What do you have to lose?
I will fix it.
I will fight harder for you than anyone has before.
The policies of Hillary Clinton have brought only suffering in our inner cities ... just like her bad judgment overseas unleashed suffering everywhere she went.
Of course, she got rich through it all ... the Clintons made another $60 million in gross income while she was Secretary of State.
Worst of all, she put her public office up for sale ... and then bleached her emails, and destroyed her phones, to try to cover her tracks following a congressional subpoena.
There's a reason the hedge fund managers are donating to Hillary Clinton's campaign ... and not mine.
Everybody getting rich off the rigged system, and who wants nothing to change, are throwing their money at Hillary Clinton.
My campaign is powered by my own money, and by small dollar donations from everyday patriotic citizens.
95% of our donors are small dollar donations.
Every dollar helps us deliver your country back to you.
Our campaign is about breaking up the special interest monopoly in Washington, D.C. We're trying to disrupt the collusion between the wealthy donors, the large corporations, and the media executives.
They're all part of the same political establishment.
They go to the same restaurants, they attend the same conferences, they have the same friends and connections.
They all support the same ideology of globalism that makes them rich while shipping your jobs, your factories, and your wealth to other countries.
I am not running to be President of the World.
I am running to be President of the United States.
I Am For America ... and America First.
Together, we will rebuild this country beyond our greatest dreams.
Government will start working again.
Fixing things is what I do.
Just look at my projects in New York, where I turned rundown spaces into new centers of business, activity and opportunity ... where others saw only problems, I saw only potential.
We turned empty lots into homes, offices and living memories for thousands of workers and families.
That's what I want to do for our country ...
I want to go into the neglected neighborhoods, the failing schools, the forgotten stretches of this nation, and unlock their potential for all of our people.
I've made a living for years looking at unused spaces and imagining what they could be.
Politicians look at blighted neighborhoods and offer only excuses ...
I look at those same neighborhoods and offer solutions.
We spend so much time thinking about how things used to be, we've stopped thinking about how great things could be ... all we have to do is tune out the doubters, the cynics, and the naysayers.
We are a nation of strivers, dreamers, and believers ... and that's the spirit that will carry us to victory in November, and to great victories as a nation.
It's that same spirit of resilience I have seen visiting the flood-ravaged towns in Louisiana, or meeting with the incredible but hard-hit people in cities and towns like Flint, Michigan.
It used to be the cars were made in Flint, and you couldn't drink the water in Mexico.
Today, cars are made in Mexico, and you can't drink the water in Flint.
We'll turn it all around.
But that means you need to show up and vote on November 8th.
You have to knock on doors.
You have to pick up that phone.
Go to our website to learn more.
You have to campaign on the streets.
Spread the love that we have in this room to the people of our country.
To beat the system, you have to lift your voice, pound the pavement, and get out the vote.
You have 44 days until the big vote.
You have 44 days to make possible every dream you ever dreamed of for your country.
You have one magnificent chance to deliver justice for every forgotten man, woman, and child in this nation.
The arrogance of Washington, D.C. will soon come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter.
This November 8th, we are going to show the whole world that America is Back ...
Bigger and Better and Stronger than Ever Before.
Here is just some of what will happen starting in January of 2017:
I am going to lower your taxes; eliminate every unnecessary regulation; unleash American energy; end illegal immigration ... and yes we will build the wall [Mexico will pay]; save the 2nd amendment, and appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.
We will rebuild our roads, bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools, and hospitals.
American cars will travel the roads, American planes will soar in the skies, and American ships will patrol the seas.
American steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds.
And we will put our great miners and steelworkers back to work.
American hands will rebuild this nation ... and American energy, harvested from American sources, will power this nation.
American workers will be hired to do the job.
We will put new American steel into the spine of this country.
I will fight for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as One American People.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
It is time to break with the bitter failures of the past and to embrace a new, inclusive and prosperous American future.
Hillary Clinton has a 3-word campaign pledge.
It reads: "I'm With Her."
I have a different pledge: I'm With You ... the American People.
To all of our people, in all of our cities and towns, I say these words to you tonight: I'm with you, I will fight for you, and I will win for you.
Once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
Let me open by making this very important declaration: I love this state, I love the people of this state, and together we are going to have an amazing victory in November.
Decades of political failure and corruption will come swiftly to an end, and a New American Future will begin.
The citizens of this country will be in charge once more.
The special interests have had their day.
That chapter in our history is closing.
The history book is closing on the failed politicians of yesterday.
A new chapter is beginning, and this chapter will be authored by you, the American people.
This will be your time.
You will be running the show.
Not the donors, not the insiders, not the media executives.
Once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
All we have to do is cut our ties to the bitter failures of the past, and anything becomes possible.
Change is coming.
All the people who've rigged the system for their own personal benefit are trying to stop our change campaign because they know that their gravy train has reached its last stop.
It's your turn now.
This is your time.
The fact that so many encrusted old political insiders oppose our campaign is the best proof you will ever need that we are fighting for real change ... not partisan change.
We are fighting for all Americans ... Democrats, Republicans, Independents, Conservatives, Liberals ... who've been failed by this corrupt system.
We're fighting for everyone who doesn't have a voice.
We're also fighting for every region of this country.
For every part of Florida, and every part of America.
From Pensacola to Pittsburgh, from Baltimore to Baton Rouge, we are fighting for every last city and every last person in this country.
Hillary Clinton is the candidate of the past.
Ours is the campaign of the future.
In this future, we are going to pursue new trade policies that put American workers first ... and that keep jobs in our country.
All the people who got NAFTA wrong, and China wrong, and who are trying to give us the Trans-Pacific Partnership ... are the same failed voices pushing for Hillary Clinton.
Our trade deficit with the world is now nearly $800 billion dollars.
We've lost one-third of our manufacturing jobs since Bill and Hillary Clinton gave us NAFTA.
China is manipulating its currency and taking our jobs.
We are going to stop companies from leaving our country and keep those jobs right here in America.
The era of economic surrender is over.
We will also have a very strong border that stops people and drugs from illegally pouring into our country -- and we're going to build a border wall, and Mexico will pay for it.
In this new future, we are going to raise your wages.
Household incomes are over $4,000 less today than they were in the year 2000.
My tax, trade, energy, immigration and regulation reforms will get your salaries and wages up.
Hillary Clinton will continue the failed economic agenda that has only made her friends rich at your personal expense.
Many people in this room tonight, and across this country, haven't seen a real wage increase in 18 years.
The people getting rich off of our rigged system have sent tens of millions of dollars to Hillary Clinton ... much of it to her personal bank account ... to keep you from having the future you deserve.
But on November 8th, you get to vote for the future you want.
In this future, we are going to pursue new education policies.
At the center of my plan is school choice.
I want every disadvantaged child in America to be able to attend the public or private school that is right for them and their family.
In this future, we are also going to keep our country out of the endless wars that have defined Hillary Clinton's career.
To keep our country out of war, we will remember those three very famous words: Peace Through Strength.
That means rebuilding our badly depleted military.
I laid out a detailed plan this week to re-invest in our military and our troops.
We are going to build a 350 ship Navy, a 540,000 soldier Army, an Air Force of 1,200 combat-ready fighter jets, and a Marine Core built on 36 Battalions.
Crucially, we are also going to pursue a state-of-the-art missile defense.
We will start by modernizing our cruisers to provide the Ballistic Missile Defense capability our nation needs.
As we expand our Navy toward the goal of 350 ships, we will also procure additional modern destroyers that are designed to handle the missile defense mission in the coming years.
Just today we were reminded of the need for missile defense after North Korea performed its fourth nuclear test since Hillary Clinton became Secretary of State.
One more massive Hillary Clinton failure.
Just like she failed in Iran and put them on the path to nuclear weapons.
Hillary Clinton has presided over the greatest series of foreign policy failures and blunders anyone has ever seen.
Her policies have produced massive global disorder.
She handed Iraq over to ISIS, unleashing that terror group onto the world.
ISIS would not be threatening the West today if not for the decisions Hillary Clinton made.
She helped destabilize Egypt by supporting the ouster of President Mubarak in exchange for the Muslim Brotherhood.
Fortunately, President El-Sisi is now in charge, but terrorists have gained a foothold in that country.
She helped push Syria into a prolonged civil war by pushing regime change in that country too ... without any plan for the day after.
She failed with China, which has only grown more aggressive.
By the way, she also let China steal hundreds of billions of dollars in our intellectual property.
And of course, Hillary Clinton failed with her Russian Reset.
She gave up missile defense in Poland and the Czech Republic in exchange for nothing in return.
Then, she gave up 20% of U.S. uranium to Russia ...while those who benefited from the deal gave money to the Clintons.
Let's not forget, Russia went into Crimea on President Obama's watch.
Unlike Clinton and Obama, we will negotiate with Russia from a position of strength ... not weakness.
And weakness is all we get from President Obama and Hillary Clinton.
The difference between me and my opponent on Vladimir Putin, and in all negotiations, is that I negotiate by creating leverage so I can extract a good deal for the United States.
Hillary Clinton negotiates but never gets anything of value for the United States.
Putin laughs at our leaders, and takes them to the cleaners again and again.
That is why we will rebuild our military, strengthen our economy, and regain our position of leadership in the world ... so we can negotiate from a position of great strength once again.
If I cannot get a good deal for the United States, I will follow the example of Ronald Reagan and walk away.
That is completely contrary to the way President Obama and Hillary Clinton negotiate which gets nothing of value for the United States, ever.
They just keep losing.
I will end this legacy of failure and strongly defend the interests of the United States.
But I will also keep focused on the ultimate goal.
We will not seek endless conflict and hostility; we won't get trapped in the failed approaches of the past.
A future where America can find common ground with countries like Russia and China is a better future for our children.
We will pursue these relationships with our eyes wide open, and a clear understanding of our many, many differences.
I will advocate the American position with a strength and clarity President Obama and Hillary Clinton never have.
No more apology tours.
No more bowing to foreign powers.
We proudly defend America at every single turn.
America will get the respect it deserves.
And if we don't, I will walk away from the deal like you've never seen anyone walk before.
And, believe me, within a short while, they will come back -- but only on my terms, therefore the terms of the American people.
On these principles, we will pursue our long-term goals of peace ... for the sake of our kids, and for the sake of the world's future.
Hillary Clinton has failed in every single country where she has ever gotten involved, and at a very high price for the world.
Her policies have produced only death and destruction, not diplomacy.
She's trigger-happy, pushing recklessly for regime change ... but never creating or promoting stability, or advancing the core interests of the United States.
Her only real achievement as Secretary of State has been getting away with her massive email scandal.
She bleached, deleted and destroyed her emails after a subpoena from Congress.
She lied to Congress while under oath, and smashed her phones with a hammer to keep them from getting to authorities.
By the way, who has thirteen phones in the first place?
Only somebody with a whole lot to hide.
And we all know what Hillary Clinton was hiding.
She was hiding her pay-for-play scandals as Secretary of State.
Hillary Clinton isn't just part of the corrupt establishment, she is the corrupt establishment.
I just saw her press conference today where Hillary Clinton complained about all of the problems in the world.
If only we'd had a competent Secretary of State who could have prevented all of these problems from happening.
Throughout it all, Hillary Clinton and her Foundation raked in millions and millions of dollars from the most oppressive and brutal regimes on earth.
Hillary Clinton and her Foundation have cozied up to regimes that oppress and brutalize women, that murder gays, and that violate human rights on an unimaginable scale.
My Administration will be a voice for all people who are oppressed, including the millions of women being oppressed by Radical Islam.
Hillary Clinton has been there for 30 years and produced only failure.
Yet people keep giving her money and protecting her.
It's the powerful protecting the powerful.
The insiders fighting for insiders.
I am fighting for you.
All the people advising Hillary Clinton are the people responsible for the endless wars and conflicts, and the tragedies in the Middle East.
I am proud to have the support of the retired generals and admirals who know how to win ... and how to avoid endless war.
Let me also take this moment to express our deepest thanks and gratitude to everyone who has worn the uniform, but most especially to those who have given the ultimate sacrifice for this country.
There is no greater expression of love than the love shown by the men and women who have laid down their lives for their country and its people.
It is our duty to ensure that their sacrifices are not in vain.
That means we don't issue timetables for political reasons, but that we work with our generals and our leaders to produce a real plan for victory.
We will pursue a new, steady foreign policy that seeks to advance the national security interests of the United States ... not a reckless, interventionist globalism that has failed this country so badly.
And we will be clear in naming our enemy: Radical Islamic Terrorism.
The fact that Hillary Clinton can't even say these words proves how unfit she is to lead this country.
This is one single fact she can never escape.
Any country that shares our goal of defeating this enemy will be our partner in this mission.
We will break the cycle of regime change, and refugee crisis, that has gone on for so many years.
We simply can't afford to continue down the road we are on right now.
That applies to everything.
Change is needed at every single level of our society.
When I talk about making America Great Again, I'm talking about creating a future that includes each and every American.
I want the most inclusive, generous and prosperous society we have ever had.
The possibilities for our future are unlimited.
The Hillary Clinton campaign is so small, so petty, so tired.
If we just break from this bitter, divisive past, we can achieve anything.
That also means breaking from the lies and the deceit of the Clintons.
They want to scare you out of voting for change.
The most recent smear comes from Bill Clinton, who said that the theme of Make America Great Again is somehow racist ... now they've unearthed video footage of Bill Clinton repeatedly using this same phrase.
It's just one more Clinton lie, one more desperate slander to keep the people from having the future they deserve.
When I talk about Making America Great Again, I'm talking about making it Great Again for Everyone ... but especially for all of the Americans who have been left behind.
We are the campaign of unity, and we will deliver amazing things for all of our people.
New schools, new factories, new infrastructure.
Beautiful skyscrapers will rise all across this nation.
We will develop Detroit, Not Beijing.
Most importantly, we will fight to end the systemic poverty in our inner cities, and to lift millions of African-Americans and Hispanics out of poverty.
Here, in Florida, we have such an amazing and diverse community of Hispanic-Americans ... from Cuba, from Puerto Rico, from Venezuela, from Haiti, from all over.
These incredible Americans will have in Donald J. Trump a President who is determined to fight for their jobs, their wages, their schools, and their futures.
To all Hispanic-Americans who want better jobs and higher wages: I will be your champion.
All working people, of all backgrounds and from all places, will have a true friend in Donald Trump.
In particular, I have a very special place in my heart for those who make a living as tradesmen, craftsmen and construction workers.
I've spent my professional life among construction workers, bricklayers, electricians and plumbers.
I feel more comfortable around blue collar workers than Wall Street executives.
There's a reason the hedge fund managers are funding Hillary Clinton's campaign, and not mine.
My campaign is powered by my own money, but also small dollar donations from people like all of you who just want their country back.
This is our chance.
It's our last chance to give the people control over their own futures once again.
Gleaming new plants stretching across our nation.
Young Latino children getting an amazing education at the school of their choice ... and their parents having their jobs protected from unfair competition.
Our Veterans will get the best healthcare in the world.
You can read the whole plan on our website, DonaldJTrump.com.
Massive tax reductions and tax simplification ... so that you can keep more of your precious time and your hard-earned money.
Hillary Clinton wants to raise your taxes big time.
Most importantly, 2017 will be about unity.
Once again, we will be One American Nation.
We Will Be One American People.
Just imagine what we can accomplish together if we set aside our differences, and focus on what we have in common as Americans.
We will be one people, living under One God, saluting one beautiful American Flag.
We Will Make America Proud Again.
We Will Make America Prosperous Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
Friends and fellow citizens, We Will Make America Great Again!
The National Guard of the United States has defended this nation at war, kept our citizens safe at home, and rushed into danger wherever it has threatened our people.
Our debt to you is eternal.
Yesterday was the 15th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks.
The National Guard was sent to assist in the aid and recovery efforts at Ground Zero in New York City.
Since 9/11, there have been 780,000 members of the National Guard deployed overseas ... including those with multiple deployments.
Right now, 10,000 members of the National Guard are in Iraq, Afghanistan, and many other countries across the world.
Members of the National Guard come from all walks of life, work in every kind of job imaginable, and juggle a thousand different challenges as they raise their kids, serve their states, and answer the call of duty for their country.
If I am given the honor to serve as your President, I will pledge to give you the resources, the equipment, and the support you need and deserve.
You will have a true and loyal friend in the White House.
Whether you vote for me, or whether you vote for someone else, I will be your greatest champion.
I will not let you down.
I am running to be a President for all Americans ... and I've been especially humbled to have the support of so many of our men and women in uniform.
All across this country, I've met so many incredible members of both our military and law enforcement community.
There's nothing I've enjoyed more than the time I've spent with our service members, police officers, and also our firefighters and paramedics.
They embody the goodness and decency of our country.
I was thus deeply shocked and alarmed this Friday to hear my opponent attack, slander, smear and demean these wonderful, amazing people who are supporting our campaign.
Our support comes from every part of America, and every walk of life.
We have the support of cops and soldiers, carpenters and welders, the young and the old, and millions of working class families who just want a better future.
These were the people Hillary Clinton so viciously demonized.
These were among the countless Americans that Hillary Clinton called deplorable, irredeemable and un-American.
She called these patriotic men and women every vile name in the book ... she called them racist, sexist, xenophobic, and Islamaphobic.
She called them a "basket of deplorables" in both a speech and an interview.
She divides people into baskets as though they were objects, not human beings.
Hillary Clinton made these comments at one of her high-dollar fundraisers in Wall Street.
She and her wealthy donors all had a good laugh.
They were laughing at the very people who pave the roads she drives on, paint the buildings she speaks in, and keep the lights on in her auditorium.
Hillary Clinton is an insider, supported by powerful insiders, attacking Americans who have no political power.
Hillary Clinton spoke with hatred and derision for the people who make this country run.
She spoke with contempt for the people who thanklessly follow the rules, pay their taxes, and scratch out a living for their families.
While Hillary Clinton lives a sequestered life behind gates and walls and guards, she mocks and demeans hardworking Americans who only want their own families to enjoy a fraction of the security enjoyed by our politicians.
After months of hiding from the press, Hillary Clinton has revealed her true thoughts.
She revealed herself to be a person who looks down on the proud citizens of our country as subjects for her to rule over.
Her comments displayed the same sense of arrogance and entitlement that led her to violate federal law as Secretary of State, hide and delete her emails, put classified information in the reach of our enemies, lie to Congress, and sell government favors and access through her Foundation.
It's the same attitude that explains why Hillary Clinton refuses to take accountability for the deadly disasters she helped to create in Iraq, in Syria and in Libya.
To this day, she still won't take accountability for her role in unleashing ISIS across the Middle East ... or for putting Iran on the path to a nuclear weapon.
Hillary Clinton believes she is above the law, that she is above accountability, and that she is above each and every one of you.
Our campaign is about giving voice to the voiceless.
It's about representing the forgotten men and women of this country.
I'm here to represent everyone, but especially those who are struggling against injustice and unfairness.
I am running so that the powerful can no longer beat up on the powerless.
I'm running to take on the special interests, the big donors, and the corrupt political insiders.
I am running to be your voice.
Hillary Clinton is a voice for Wall Street, for hedge fund managers, for the top tenth of the one percent.
Just look at the people funding Hillary Clinton's campaign, and paying for her speeches, and you'll know who she represents.
The disdain that Hillary Clinton expressed towards millions of decent Americans disqualifies her from public service.
You cannot run for President if you have such contempt in your heart for the American voter.
You can't lead this nation if you have such a low opinion of its citizens.
Hillary Clinton still hasn't apologized to those she slandered.
In fact, she hasn't backed down at all ... she's doubled-down on her campaign of conspiracy and contempt.
If Hillary Clinton will not retract her comments in full, then I don't see how she can credibly campaign.
Let's be clear.
These were not offhand comments from Hillary Clinton.
These were not stray remarks in an interview, or an accidental choice of words.
These were lengthy, planned, and prepared remarks ... it was perhaps the most explicit attack on the American voter ever spoken by a major-party presidential nominee.
Clinton was using a very deliberate page from the Democratic Playbook ... smearing someone with one of those names in order to scare them out of voting for change.
She just took it to a whole new level by applying it to tens of millions of people.
She used these vile words in order to bully and intimidate honest citizens out of seeking government reform.
People who want their immigration laws enforced, and their borders secured, are not racists.
They are patriotic Americans of all backgrounds who want their jobs and families protected.
People who warn about Radical Islamic Terrorism are not Islamophobes.
They are decent American citizens who want to uphold our tolerant values and keep our country safe.
People who support the police, and who want crime reduced, are not prejudiced.
They are concerned and loving citizens whose hearts break every time an innocent child is lost to preventable violence.
Hillary Clinton doesn't have to worry about Sanctuary Cities, or jobs moving overseas.
She's protected from her own policies.
The policies of Hillary Clinton have produced failing schools, shrinking incomes, and the tragic poverty and joblessness in our inner cities.
Our campaign is dedicated to changing these policies to make life better for all Americans.
We are the campaign of school choice.
We are the campaign dedicated to improving economic conditions for every African-American and Hispanic worker.
We are the campaign that will deliver a government of, by and for the people.
This change agenda includes a new foreign and military policy.
We are going to put the failed policies of the past behind us.
We will empower our generals to do the job they were hired to do ... and that begins with defeating and destroying ISIS.
Instead of endless wars, we want a real plan for victory.
We will abandon the policy of reckless regime change favored by my opponent, and we will instead work with our allies to advance the core national security interests of the United States.
My plan calls for a major rebuilding of the entire military, and the elimination of the defense sequester.
In this rebuilding, we will provide our National Guard with the best, modern state-of-the-art equipment in the world.
The National Guard is often the first and the last line of defense for our people.
You are there when the hurricanes and floods and tornadoes strike.
You are there to protect civilians in times of unrest.
You are there to respond to every natural disaster.
You deserve a government that recognizes and honors your contribution, and that ensures you have the resources you need to get the job done.
In a Trump Administration, the National Guard will always have a direct line to the Oval Office.
You will have an Administration that never loses sight of the vital contribution you make each and every day.
You will have a President who supports, promotes and speaks up for the National Guard at every turn.
The members of the National Guard have sacrificed life and limb for our freedom, our safety and our country.
We will never forget our heroes, their families, and the ones they've left behind.
Our gratitude is everlasting.
We will protect those who protect us.
And we will follow your example of unity ... working in common purpose and common cause.
We will be one people, under one God, saluting one American flag.
We will rebuild our military ... and our country.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And We Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless you all.
Together, we are going to win Iowa in November -- and we are going to win the White House, and Make America Great Again.
The White House will become the People's House.
We will tackle and fix the problems that have gone unsolved for years.
We are going to fix our crumbling infrastructure, renegotiate our disastrous trade deals, free children from failing government schools, eliminate government waste, and create a fair, simple and efficient tax code that adds millions of new jobs.
Prosperity will rise, poverty will recede, and wages will finally begin to grow ... and they will grow rapidly.
This is a campaign about big ideas designed to help everyday people.
In recent days, we've rolled out one new policy idea after another ... on taxes, on school choice, on foreign policy, on defeating terrorism, on rebuilding our military, on Veterans care, on unleashing American energy, and on the vital issue of trade.
By contrast, Hillary Clinton is running a policy-free campaign.
She offers no ideas, no solutions, only hatred and derision.
I am running to be a President for all Americans ... Democrat, Republican, Independent, everyone.
Whether you vote for me, or whether you vote for someone else, I will be your greatest champion.
Our support comes from every part of America, and every walk of life.
We have the support of cops and soldiers, carpenters and welders, accountants and lawyers, the young and the old, and millions of working class families all over this nation.
While my opponent slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable, I call you hardworking American patriots who love your country and want a better future for all of our people.
Her comments displayed the same sense of arrogance and entitlement that led her to violate federal law as Secretary of State, hide and delete her emails, put classified information in the reach of our enemies, lie to Congress, and sell government favors and access through the Clinton Foundation.
It's this attitude of arrogance that explains why Hillary Clinton made her 13 phones disappear ... including with a hammer ... so the FBI couldn't see them, and why she bleached her emails after a congressional subpoena.
Now the people who destroyed the emails are all pleading the fifth amendment in front of Congress today.
Anyone watching today's hearing in Congress knows that Hillary Clinton's actions are far more corrupt than we even imagined.
This is a far bigger scandal than Watergate ever was, but with Watergate we had the Justice Department doing its jobs ... here we don't have either.
This is a scandal that threatens national security and that involves a multimillion dollar pay-for-play scheme between the Secretary of State and her Foundation.
Whether it's her emails, her disasters in Iraq, Libya and Syria, or her failures on the economy, Hillary Clinton lacks the judgement, temperament and moral character to lead this country.
In the words of a secret service agent posted outside her office: "she simply lacks the integrity and the temperament to serve in the office...from the bottom of my soul, I know this to be true."
The policies of Hillary Clinton have produced death and destruction overseas, and produced only failing schools, rising crime, job loss, shrinking incomes, and tragic poverty at home.
1 in 5 American households do not have a single member in the labor force.
Another 14 million people left the labor force entirely since 2009.
And the national debt has doubled to nearly $20 trillion during the Obama Years.
I am running to reverse these policies, and to create a future of prosperity for all Americans.
That includes our family farms right here in Iowa.
Family farms are the backbone of this country.
We are going to end the EPA intrusion into your family homes and your family farms.
We are going to protect the Renewable Fuel Standard, corn-based ethanol, eliminate job-killing regulations like the Waters of the U.S. rule, and provide desperately-needed tax relief.
Our plan lowers the tax rate on family farms down to 15 percent, and to stop the double-taxation of family farms at death ... helping to ensure that the family farm tradition in Iowa continues to thrive and flourish.
My economic agenda can be summed up in three words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
That means we are going to negotiate trade deals to protect our farmers, help them export their goods, and grow family farming in America.
My first day in office, I am also going to order a review of every single regulation issued over the last eight years.
All needless, job-killing regulations will be cancelled.
Millions of new jobs will come pouring in.
We are going to lift the restrictions on American energy ... which means lower electricity prices for our farmers, and half a million new jobs a year.
That's just the beginning.
Also on my first day, I am going to ask Congress to send me a bill to immediately repeal and replace disastrous Obamacare ... this will instantly save another 2 million jobs.
By the way, remember when Jonathan Gruber, the architect of Obamacare, said the "lack of transparency," was essential to passing the legislation and then he talked about ... and I quote ... "the stupidity of the American voter."
This is the hateful attitude of insiders like Mr. Gruber and Hillary Clinton ... and the voters have had enough.
They're taking their country back.
Another major reform is going to be school choice.
I've outlined a plan to provide every disadvantaged child in America the freedom to choose the private, public, magnet or religious school of his or her choice.
This will help lift millions of poor African-American and Hispanic children out of poverty.
It's time to break-up the failed Democratic control over our inner cities, and provide real hope and opportunity to every single community in this nation.
Our policies on taxes, trade, regulations and education will grow incomes, boost jobs and reduce poverty for our African-American and Hispanic communities.
We need a new civil rights agenda for our time, one that promises safe neighborhoods, great education, and secure jobs.
Nearly 4 in 10 African-American children live in poverty, including 45% of African-American children under the age of six.
58% of African-American youth are not working.
Violent crime rose in America's fifty largest cities last year.
Homicides are up nearly 50% in Washington, D.C. and more than 60% in Baltimore.
Over 3,000 people have been shot in Chicago since January of this year.
There's a shooting on average every 2 hours.
To those suffering and hurting I say: what do you have to lose ... vote for Donald J. Trump.
I will fix it.
I will bring back millions of jobs, higher wages, and great schools.
I will make your communities safe.
Safety also means protecting our people from Radical Islamic Terrorism.
New video has just been released showing ISIS butchers murdering innocent people in what has been called a Syrian slaughterhouse.
The victims were dragged, then hung from meathooks, and then their throats were slit.
This is an evil, sadistic, monstrous enemy and we must keep these killers out of our country.
We know that ISIS is trying to infiltrate refugee flows, and to recruit refugees after their entry to our country.
My opponent wants a 550% increase in Syrian refugees.
According to the Senate Subcommittee on immigration, her entire plan will bring in 620,000 refugees in her first term and cost $400 billion in lifetime benefits.
Instead of providing free healthcare and jobs to refugees from around the world, we should rebuild our inner cities and help struggling Americans get jobs.
I support the construction of safe zones in the region, and we will get the Gulf States to pay for it.
At the same time, as we rebuild our military, we are going to get our allies to pay their fair share.
Only 5 of the 28 member NATO countries meet their obligation to spend 2% of GDP on defense.
I will convene a summit of our European and Asian allies to make sure everyone is sharing in the security burden ... and that we are properly focused on Radical Islamic Terrorism.
In all things, it's time to put Americans first ... and start taking care of each other.
Tonight, I am going to roll out a plan to help our mothers and our families get affordable, quality childcare for their children.
On policy after policy, we are going to provide opportunity, prosperity and security for all Americans.
I am going to lower your taxes; I am going to get rid of massive amounts of unnecessary regulations, on business and in your life; I'm going to repeal and replace Obamacare; I'm going to appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will follow the Constitution; I'm going rebuild our depleted military and take care of our vets; I'm going to save your 2nd amendment.
I'm going to stop illegal immigration and drugs coming into our country, and yes, we will build the wall and I'm going to, so importantly, renegotiate your horrible trade deals, especially NAFTA ... which is the single worst trade deal ever made by any country anywhere in the world a one-way street for jobs out of the United States ... and we will make great trade deals that put the American worker first.
And Apple, and our other major companies, will start making their iPhones, computers and other products inside of the United States ... not in China, and all over the world.
We don't make our products anymore in the United States, but we will again ... like never before.
We will rebuild our roads, bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools and hospitals.
American cars will travel the roads, American planes will soar in the skies, and American ships will patrol the seas.
American steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds.
American hands will rebuild this nation ... and American energy, mined from American sources, will power this nation.
American workers will be hired to do the job.
We will put new American metal into the spine of this country.
I will fight for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as One American People.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
It is time to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a new, inclusive and prosperous American future.
Jobs will return, incomes will rise, and new factories will come rushing back to our shores.
Once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
We Will Make America Prosperous Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
I am honored to be here today and to shine a national spotlight on a group of victims who have been forced into the shadows.
Your stories are not featured in the news, you have no demonstrators taking to the streets on your behalf, you have no special interests taking up your cause, and politicians ignore your cries for help.
But I never will.
I have met many incredible people during the course of this campaign.
But nothing has moved me more deeply than the time I've spent with the families of the Remembrance Project, and the incredible strength and courage you've shown in your often lonely fight for justice.
You are heroes.
And your actions will help us to save the next thousand American citizens from losing their brothers, sisters, sons, daughters or parents.
The most fundamental duty of government is to protect American lives.
Anyone who fails to understand this is not fit to hold public office.
Every day our border remains open, innocent Americans are needlessly victimized.
Every day Sanctuary Cities are left in place, innocent Americans are put in harm's way.
Every day we fail to enforce our laws is a day when a loving parent is at risk of losing their child.
It's happening every single day.
All across this country, dining room tables have an empty seat at the family dinner table, because our government abandoned its duty and failed to enforce the laws.
There are a lot of numbers in the immigration debate.
But let me give you the most important number of all.
That most important number of all is the number of American lives it is acceptable to lose in the name of illegal immigration.
Let me tell you what that number is: ZERO.
Our nation should not accept one lost American life because our country failed to enforce its laws.
What do you tell to the mother, who just buried her daughter, because someone was released at the border who should have been sent home?
What do you tell to the young boy, who will grow up without a dad, because a criminal was deported five times but was allowed to keep coming back into the country?
What do you tell the wife, who has lost her husband, because a Sanctuary City released an illegal immigrant from behind bars?
This must end.
And it must end right now.
Not one more American life should be given up in the name of open borders.
Just look at what's happened in the last few days.
Last week it was reported that authorities detained an illegal immigrant in the Austin area who is responsible for nearly a dozen sexual assaults and had been previously deported five times within a three-year period.
Earlier this week, in Kansas, a Sheriff's Department Master Deputy was killed, apparently by an illegal immigrant.
The driver was previously arrested for a DUI in California in 2001 and for a traffic violation in Kansas in 2013.
Deputy Collins was killed only hours after his daughter's fourth birthday.
A few days ago, two correctional officers in California were critically wounded after being shot by an illegal immigrant who overstayed his visa.
This individual had been convicted for child rape and was slated to be deported ... but his home country refused to take him back, so he was simply released.
One of the victims has six children, is an Air Force Veteran, and a high school football coach ... the other victim is a mother and a grandmother.
When Hillary Clinton was Secretary of State, the matter of this country refusing to take back their deported citizens came before Hillary Clinton's desk.
But she failed to take forceful action, and ignored the federal law requiring her to suspend visas to countries that don't take back their citizens.
According to a report from the Boston Globe, from the year 2008 through 2014, nearly 13,000 criminal aliens were released back into U.S. communities because their home countries would not take them back.
Most of these 13,000 releases occurred on Hillary Clinton's watch ... she had the power and the duty to stop it cold and she didn't do it.
Now, my opponent will never meet with you.
She will never hear your stories.
She will never share in your pain.
She will only meet with the donors and the special interests and the open border advocates.
Her plan calls for total amnesty in the first 100 days, which means Obamacare, Social Security and Medicare for illegal immigrants.
Her plan calls for catch-and-release on the border.
Sanctuary Cities.
Ignoring visa overstays.
Closing detention centers.
And a virtual end to immigration enforcement in the United States of America.
Hillary Clinton has even announced that she plans to go around Congress and implement amnesty by executive order ... violating our Constitution and putting the entire nation in grave peril.
Hillary Clinton is the first person to ever run for the Presidency of a country effectively proposing to abolish the borders around that country.
But the media doesn't want you to know any of that.
So they'll never ask her any questions about her plan.
Like how she'll afford to give lifetime welfare and entitlements to illegal immigrants, or how many people will be victimized because of the illegal immigrants that will be released from federal custody ... or at the border.
She's not asked to explain what she'll say to the American workers who lose their jobs when she prints out millions of work permits for those here against the law.
Your cause, and your stories, are ignored by our political establishment because they are determined to keep our border open at any cost.
To them, your presence is just too inconvenient.
But help is coming.
On November 8th, we are going to win the White House and we are going to deliver justice for every American family and every American victim.
Together, we will save American lives ... and prevent the next thousand American parents from suffering the same fate as the people in the room today.
Since 2013 alone, the Obama Administration has allowed 300,000 criminal aliens to return back into U.S. communities ... these are individuals encountered or identified by ICE but who were not detained or processed for deportation.
According to the federal government's own data, there are more than 2 million convicted criminal illegal immigrants inside the United States right now.
However, this figure does not even include the many individuals who have committed crimes but escaped justice, fled the jurisdiction, or were otherwise never caught.
Many crimes committed by people here illegally remain open cases.
At the same time, hundreds of individuals who have been given visas and refugee admissions into this country have subsequently been charged with terrorism.
We are admitting people here with no idea who they are or what they believe.
Whether it's drugs, terrorism or violent crime, our government is utterly failing in its core mission to defend and protect the people of this country.
The Border Patrol Agents, who endorsed me, warned that Hillary Clinton's plan would put the entire country in grave danger ... they called it radical, deeply dangerous, and warned it would trigger an unprecedented national crisis.
Let's just remember our goal ... to prevent the next family from suffering the same terrible fate.
That is what is at stake in this election.
So I am now going to invite some of the bravest people I know to come up to the stage and speak.
[INVITE FAMILIES TO SPEAK]
These wounded American families have been alone.
But they are alone no longer.
I am here standing with you.
The American people are here standing with you.
And come November, your long awaited day of justice will finally arrive.
New polls have just come in, and we're leading in battleground states all over this country ... including four points here in Florida.
LA Times has us up 6 points nationwide.
Come November 8th, we are going to win Florida and we are going to win the White House.
It's going to be a victory for the people ... it's going to be a victory for the workers, the families, the Veterans, the everyday citizens.
And it's going to be a victory for those who haven't had reason for hope in a long time.
I'm campaigning in every community, and every part of this country, for every last vote.
I am running to be a President for all Americans.
I just had the most amazing afternoon in Little Haiti and I'm going to be campaigning hard for their votes.
What incredible people.
Our support comes from all regions, all backgrounds and all walks of life.
You are cops and soldiers, carpenters and welders, accountants and lawyers, young and old, rich and poor, black, white and Hispanic ... but above all else, you are American.
Just today, I was honored to get the endorsement of recipients of the Medal of Honor and many of our amazing military leaders.
We now have the endorsements of more than 160 top generals and Admirals.
We also have the support of 16,500 Border Patrol Officers ... as well as law enforcement officers across the country.
And we have the support of millions of patriotic Moms and Dads who go to work every day and make this country run.
While my opponent slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable, I call you hardworking American patriots who love your family and love your country.
Clinton's campaign relies on the tired tactic of smearing opponents who question her policies as racists.
It's the oldest play in the Democratic play book ... and Americans have had enough.
They want solutions, and they want better lives ... not more petty attacks from failed and discredited politicians.
People who want their immigration laws enforced, and their borders secured, are not racists.
They are patriotic Americans of all backgrounds who want their jobs and families protected.
People who warn about Radical Islamic Terrorism are not Islamophobes.
They are decent American citizens who want to uphold our tolerant values and keep our country safe.
People who support the police, and who want crime reduced, are not prejudiced.
They are concerned and loving citizens whose hearts break every time an innocent child is lost to preventable violence.
Yet, while she lives behind gates and walls and guards, and raises millions from hedge fund managers and Wall Street donors, she slanders and smears working people who just want a fraction of the security enjoyed by our politicians.
Her comments displayed the same sense of arrogance and entitlement that led her to violate federal law as Secretary of State, hide and delete her emails, destroy her phones with a hammer, put classified information in the reach of our enemies, lie to Congress, and sell government favors and access through the Clinton Foundation.
It's the same attitude of arrogance and entitlement that explains why she has never taken accountability for the disasters she created in Libya, Syria, Iraq, Iran and all over the world.
It's the same reason why she won't take responsibility for her central role in unleashing ISIS.
Her policies have created disaster overseas, and poverty at home.
I am running to reverse these failures, and create a New American future.
That future begins with prosperity at home.
My economic agenda can be summed up in three words: jobs, jobs, jobs.
One of my highest priorities is to bring jobs into our inner cities.
African-Americans communities have suffered horribly as a result of failed Democratic leadership.
Democrats have run these inner cities for half a century.
They control the mayors' offices, the school boards, the city councils, and the seats in Congress ... and all they have delivered is more poverty, more crime, and more failing schools.
45% of African-American children under the age of 6 now live in poverty.
More than 3,000 have been shot in Chicago this year alone.
58% of African-American youth are not working.
These are the results of the policies embraced by Hillary Clinton, and everyone knows that if she's elected the inner cities will get nothing but more pain and more suffering.
Hillary Clinton has been there in Washington for 30 years ... her disastrous record speaks for itself.
The only people she delivers for is her donors.
I am going to deliver for you, the American people.
If we lower our taxes, remove destructive regulations, unleash the vast treasure of American energy, and negotiate trade deals that put America First, then there is no limit to the number of jobs we can create and the amount of prosperity we can unleash.
My first day in office, I am going to order a review of every single regulation issued over the last eight years.
All needless, job-killing regulations will be cancelled.
Millions of new jobs will come pouring in.
We are going to lift the restrictions on American energy ... which means at least another half a million new jobs a year.
That's just the beginning.
Also on my first day, I am going to ask Congress to send me a bill to immediately repeal and replace disastrous Obamacare ... this will instantly save another 2 million jobs.
I am also going to completely reform our trade deals.
We are going to renegotiate NAFTA, stand up to China, and keep America out of the TPP.
We don't need another massive multinational deal that ties us up and binds us down.
Another major reform is going to be school choice.
I've outlined a plan to provide every disadvantaged child in America the freedom to choose the private, public, magnet or religious school of his or her choice.
This will help lift millions of poor African-American and Hispanic children out of poverty.
Since President Obama came into office, another 2 million Hispanic-Americans have fallen into poverty.
This is unacceptable.
To the Hispanic community I say: we are going to protect your jobs, we are going to build up your schools, and we are going to deliver safety and opportunity for your children.
Earlier this week, I also rolled out a plan to help our mothers and our families get affordable, quality childcare for their children.
On policy after policy, we are going to provide opportunity, prosperity and security for all Americans.
We are also going to stand with the Cuban people in their fight against communist oppression.
The President's one-sided deal for Cuba benefits only the Castro Regime.
But all of the concessions that Barack Obama has granted the Castro Regime were done through executive order, which means the next President can reverse them ... and that is what I will do, unless the Castro Regime meets our demands.
Those demands will include religious and political freedom for the Cuban people.
Let's also talk about Venezuela.
Venezuela is a beautiful, vibrant, and resource-rich country, filled with amazing and hardworking people.
But Venezuela has been run into the ground by socialists.
The next President of the United States must stand in solidarity with all people oppressed in our hemisphere, and I will stand with the oppressed people of Venezuela yearning to be free.
Here, in America, I will push to expand freedom for all of our people.
I am going to lower you taxes; I am going to get rid of massive amounts of unnecessary regulations, on business and in your life; I'm going to repeal and replace Obamacare; I'm going to appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will follow the Constitution; I'm going to rebuild our depleted military and take care of our vets; I'm going to save your 2nd amendment; I'm going to stop illegal immigration and drugs coming into our country, and yes, we will build the wall and I'm going to renegotiate our disastrous trade deals, especially NAFTA ... and we will make great trade deals that put the American worker first.
We will rebuild our roads, bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools and hospitals.
American cars will travel the roads, American planes will soar in the skies, and American ships will patrol the seas.
American steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds.
American hands will rebuild this nation ... and American energy, mined from American sources, will power this nation.
American workers will be hired to do the job.
We will put new American steel into the spine of this country.
I will fight for every neglected part of this nation ... and I will fight to bring us all together as One American People.
Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as One People, under One God, saluting One American Flag.
It is time to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a new, inclusive and prosperous American future.
Jobs will return, incomes will rise, and new factories will come rushing back to our shores.
Once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.
We Will Make America Prosperous Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
And Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
Today, I'm going to outline a plan for American economic revival ... it is a bold, ambitious, forward-looking plan to massively increase jobs, wages, incomes and opportunities for the people of our country.
My plan will embrace the truth that people flourish under a minimum government burden, and it will tap into the incredible unrealized potential of our workers and their dreams.
Right now, 92 million Americans are on the sidelines, outside the workforce, and not part of our economy.
It's a silent nation of jobless Americans.
Look no further than the city of Flint, where I just visited.
The jobs have stripped from this community, and its infrastructure has collapsed.
In 1970, there were more than 80,000 people in Flint working for GM ... today it is less than 8,000.
Now Ford has announced it is moving all small car production to Mexico.
It used to be cars were made in Flint and you couldn't drink the water in Mexico.
Now, the cars are made in Mexico and you can't drink the water in Flint.
We are going to turn this around.
My economic plan rejects the cynicism that says our labor force will keep declining, that our jobs will keep leaving, and that our economy can never grow as it did once before.
We reject the pessimism that says our standard of living can no longer rise, and that all that's left to do is divide up and redistribute our shrinking resources.
Everything that is broken today can be fixed, and every failure can be turned into a great success.
Jobs can stop leaving our country, and start pouring in.
Failing schools can become flourishing schools.
Crumbling roads and bridges can become gleaming new infrastructure.
Inner cities can experience a flood of new jobs and investment.
And rising crime can give way to safe and prosperous communities.
All of these things, and so much more, are possible.
But to accomplish them, we must replace the present policy of globalism ... which has moved so many jobs and so much wealth out of our country ... and replace it with a new policy of Americanism.
Under this American System, every policy decision we make must pass a simple test: does it create more jobs and better wages for Americans?
If we lower our taxes, remove destructive regulations, unleash the vast treasure of American energy, and negotiate trade deals that put America First, then there is no limit to the number of jobs we can create and the amount of prosperity we can unleash.
America will truly be the greatest place in the world to invest, hire, grow and to create new jobs, new technologies, and entire new industries.
Instead of driving jobs and wealth away, America will become the world's great magnet for innovation and job creation.
My opponent's plan rejects this optimism.
She offers only more taxing, regulating, more spending and more wealth redistribution ... a future of slow growth, declining incomes, and dwindling prosperity.
The only people who get rich under Hillary Clinton's scheme are the donors and the special interests.
In Hillary Clinton's America, we have surrendered our status as the world's great economy, and we have surrendered our middle class to the whims of foreign countries.
Not one single idea she has will create one net American job, or create one new dollar of American wealth for our workers.
The only thing she can ever offer is a welfare check.
Our plan will produce paychecks, and they're going to be great paychecks for millions of people now unemployed.
In the course of this campaign, I have travelled all across this country and I've met the most amazing people.
Every day, I've seen the goodness and character of our country, and brave citizens proudly fighting through hard times and difficult circumstances.
In many parts of our country, the hard times never seem to end.
I've visited cities and towns in upstate New York where half the jobs have left and moved to other countries.
Politicians have abandoned these places all over our country and the people who live there.
Worse still, politicians have heaped scorn and disdain on these wonderful Americans.
My opponent described tens of millions of American citizens as deplorable and irredeemable ... how can Hillary Clinton seek to lead this country when she considers its citizens beyond redemption?
The hardworking people she calls deplorable are the most admirable people I know: they are cops and soldiers, teachers and firefighters, young and old, moms and dads, blacks, whites and Latinos ... but above everything else, they are all American.
They love their families, they love their country, and they want a better future.
These are the forgotten men and women of America.
People who work hard but don't have a voice.
I am running to be their voice, and to fight to bring prosperity to every part of this country.
Too many of our leaders have forgotten that it's their duty to protect the jobs, wages and well-being of American workers before any other consideration.
I'm not running to be President of the world.
I'm running to be President of the United States ... and as your President, I will fight for every last American job.
We are the nation that tamed the West, dug out the Panama Canal, won two World Wars, and put a man on the moon.
It's time to start thinking big once again.
That's why I believe it is time to establish a national goal of reaching 4% economic growth.
In working with my economic team, we've put together a plan that puts us on track to achieve that goal.
Over the next ten years, our economic team estimates that under our plan the economy will average 3.5% growth and create a total of 25 million new jobs.
You can visit our website to see the math.
This growth means that our jobs plan, including our childcare reforms, will be completely paid-for in combination with proposed budget savings.
It will be deficit neutral.
If we reach 4% growth, it will reduce the deficit.
It will be accomplished through a complete overhaul of our tax, regulatory, energy and trade policies.
Right now, under Obama-Clinton policies, the economy grew only 1.1 percent last quarter ... that translates to millions of lost jobs.
This is the weakest so-called recovery since the Great Depression.
Over the last 7 years, the economy grew only 2.1 percent, the slowest period in seventy years.
Had the economy grown under Obama at the same rate as Reagan, it would have meant 10 million more jobs.
Perhaps most shockingly, 1 in 6 men aged 18-34 are either in jail or out of work.
Meanwhile, another 2 million Hispanic-Americans have been added to the ranks of those in poverty.
On top of it all, the Obama-Clinton policies have doubled the national debt.
It took more than 230 years for the United States to accumulate it's first $10 trillion dollars in debt ... it took President Obama only eight years to add another $10 trillion.
Now, it would be one thing if that money had been used to completely rebuild our nation, our military, and our infrastructure.
Instead, the opposite happened.
We doubled our debt and, in return, we have dilapidated infrastructure, failing schools, a badly depleted military, and another 14 million people who have left the workforce.
Never has so much money been spent so poorly.
But we're going to turn that all around.
Here's how.
It begins with bold new tax reform.
As outlined in Detroit, our tax plan will greatly simplify the code and reduce the number of brackets from 7 to 3.
The 3 new brackets will be 12, 25 and 33, but low-income Americans will pay no income tax at all ... in fact, our plan will remove millions and millions of workers from the income tax rolls entirely.
By lowering rates, streamlining deductions, and simplifying the process, we will add millions of new jobs.
In addition, because we have strongly capped deductions for the wealthy and closed special interest loopholes, the tax relief will be concentrated on the working and middle class taxpayer.
They will receive the biggest benefit ... it won't even be close.
This is a working and middle class tax relief proposal.
The tax relief for these workers will be expanded by my childcare proposals that I have worked on with my daughter, Ivanka.
These proposals are a central element of our comprehensive tax reform and economic growth plan.
Families will be able to fully deduct the average cost of childcare from their taxes, including stay-at-home parents.
Because this deduction is capped, it will disproportionately benefit working and middle class families.
The less you make, the larger a share of your income you can exclude from taxation.
Parents will also be able to enroll in tax-free dependent care savings accounts for their children or elderly relatives.
Low-income households will benefit from both an Expanded Earned Income Tax Credit ... in the form a Childcare rebate ... and a matching $500 contribution for their savings accounts.
A married couple earning $50,000 per year with two children and $8,000 in child care expenses will save 35% from their current tax bill.
A married couple earning $75,000 per year with two children and $10,000 in child care expenses will receive a 30% reduction in their tax bill.
By contrast, someone earning $5 million will receive virtually no change in their tax bill at all.
One of our greatest job creation measures is going to be our 15% business tax rate ... down from the current 35% rate, a reduction of more than 40 percent.
An explosion of new business and new jobs will be created.
It will be amazing to watch.
We will also allow U.S.-based manufacturers to fully expense the cost of new plants and equipment.
On top of that, we will bring back trillions in business wealth parked overseas and tax it at a 10% rate.
Some people say there are $2 trillion dollars overseas, I think it's $5 trillion.
By taxing it at 10% instead of 35%, all of this money will come back into our country.
We will turn America into a magnet for new jobs ... and that means jobs in our poorest communities.
Next, comes regulations.
One of the keys to unlocking growth is scaling-back years of disastrous regulations unilaterally imposed by our out-of-control bureaucracy.
Regulations have grown into a massive, job-killing industry ... and the regulation industry is one business I will put an end to.
In 2015 alone, federal agencies issued over 3,300 final rules and regulations, up from 2,400 the prior year.
Every year, overregulation costs our economy $2 trillion dollars a year and reduces household wealth by almost $15,000 dollars.
I've proposed a moratorium on new federal regulations that are not compelled by Congress or public safety, and I will eliminate all needless and job-killing regulations now on the books.
This includes eliminating some of our most intrusive regulations, like the Waters of The U.S. Rule.
It also means scrapping the EPA's so-called Clean Power Plan which the government itself estimates will cost $7.2 billion a year.
This Obama-Clinton directive will shut down most, if not all, coal-powered electricity plans in America.
Remember what Hillary Clinton said?
She wants to shut down the miners, just like she wants to shut down the steel mills.
We're going to put our great miners and steel workers back to work.
Energy reform is central to our plan as well
According to the Heritage Foundation, by 2030, President Obama's energy restrictions will eliminate another half a million manufacturing jobs, reduce economic output by $2.5 trillion dollars, and reduce incomes by $7,000 dollars per person.
Hillary Clinton wants to go even further, and her plan could cost the economy $5 trillion dollars.
A Trump Administration will lift restrictions on all sources of American energy production.
According to the Institute for American Energy Resources this will:
increase GDP by more than $100 billion annually
add over 500,000 new jobs annually
increase annual wages by more than $30 billion over the next 7 years
increase federal, state, and local tax revenues by almost $6 trillion over 4 decades
increase total economic activity by more than $20 trillion over the next 40 years.
In addition, we will streamline the permitting process for all energy infrastructure projects, including the billions of dollars in projects held up by President Obama ... creating countless more jobs in the process.
Finally, comes trade ... the foundation for everything
America's annual trade deficit with the world is now nearly $800 a billion a year ... an enormous drag on growth.
Between World War II and the year 2000, the United States averaged a 3.5% growth rate.
But, after China joined the World Trade Organization, our average growth rate has been reduced to only 2 percent.
Predatory trade practices, product dumping, currency manipulation and intellectual property theft have taken millions of jobs and trillions in wealth from our country.
It is no great secret that many of the special interests funding my opponent's campaign are the same people profiting from these terrible trade deals.
The same so-called experts advising Hillary Clinton are the same people who gave us NAFTA, China's entry into the World Trade Organization, the job-killing trade deal with South Korea, and now the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
The verdict is in.
All of the special interests that the media race to for comment have been proven wrong about every single deal they've promoted ... every lie and every prediction has crashed upon the rocks of reality.
Our manufacturing base has crumbled, communities have been hollowed out, wages have declined, and households are making less today than they were in the year 2000.
I have proposed a detailed plan to reform our trade policies and bring vast new jobs and wealth to America.
This includes the following steps:
I'm going to direct the Secretary of Commerce to identify every violation of trade agreements a foreign country is currently using to harm our workers.
I will use every tool under American and international law to end these abuses, and I will use our greatest business leaders and finest negotiators ... and I know who you are, many of you are in the room.
We are going to start with NAFTA, which is causing so much damage to our country.
We will entirely renegotiate NAFTA into a deal that will either be good for us or will be terminated until a brand new and productive deal can be signed.
We are also going to keep America out of the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Next, I am going to instruct my Treasury Secretary to label China a currency manipulator, and to apply tariffs to any country that devalues its currency to gain an unfair advantage over the United States.
I am going to instruct the U.S. Trade Representative to bring trade cases against China.
China's unfair subsidy behavior is prohibited by the terms of its entrance to the WTO, and I intend to enforce those rules.
If China does not stop its illegal activities, including its theft of American trade secrets and intellectual property, I will apply countervailing duties until China ceases and desists.
Just the single action of enforcing intellectual property rules alone would add millions of new American jobs.
According to the U.S. International Trade Commission, improved protection of America's intellectual property in China would add 2 million jobs a year to the United States every single year.
We are going to stop the outflow of jobs from our country, and open a new highway of jobs back into our country.
Here is how the plan adds up
We are proposing a $4.4 trillion tax cut that will score as $2.6 trillion under a dynamic growth model, which is how taxes should be scored.
This includes the childcare plan.
Our economic team has further modeled that the growth-induced savings from trade, energy and regulation reform will shave at least another $1.8 trillion off of the remaining cost.
That leaves around $800 billion dollars.
This money can all be saved through simple, common sense reforms.
If we save just one penny of each federal dollar spent on non-defense, and non-entitlement programs, we can save almost $1 trillion over the next decade ... again this is spending that does not touch defense, and that does not touch entitlements.
If our plan exceeds the 3.5% ten-year growth average, then our jobs proposal will actually reduce the deficit.
Savings will be compounded by the fact that people who are currently receiving unemployment or welfare will finally be able to find jobs.
This is the most pro-growth, pro-jobs, pro-family plan put forth perhaps in the history of our country.
This is what our new future will look like
I am going to lower you taxes; I am going to get rid of massive amounts of unnecessary regulations, on business and in your life; I'm going to unleash American energy; I'm going to repeal and replace Obamacare; I'm going to appoint Justices to the Supreme Court who will follow the Constitution; I'm going rebuild our depleted military and take care of our vets; I'm going to save your 2nd amendment; I'm going to stop illegal immigration and drugs coming into our country, and yes, we will build the wall [Mexico will pay]; and I'm going to renegotiate our disastrous trade deals, especially NAFTA ... and we will only make great trade deals that put the American worker first.
And we are going to put our miners and our steelworkers back to work.
We will rebuild our roads, bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools and hospitals.
American cars will travel the roads, American planes will soar in the skies, and American ships will patrol the seas.
American steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds.
American hands will rebuild this nation ... and American energy, harvested from American sources, will power this nation.
American workers will be hired to do the job.
We will put new American metal into the spine of this country.
Jobs will return, incomes will rise, and new factories will come rushing back to our shores.
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Strong Again.
And Will Make America Great Again.
Thank you, and God Bless!
