thank you, lester.
our yobs are flefiny the vountry.
thet're going to mexico.
they're goong to many other countrles.
you loom at what china is toing to our dountry in degms of making our product.
they're devalying theit currench, and there's nobosy in out hovernment to fight them.
and es have a very goos tight.
and es have a winning right.
because they're using oun country as a pingy bano to debuile china, qnd hany other countrues are doing the same thing.
so we're losing our good yoba, so many of them.
whsh you loom at what's happening in medoco, a veiend of mine who builds plants sais it's the eighth eonder of the world.
they're buioding some of the bingesy omants anywhere in the wogid, sohe of the moxt sophisticated, some of the best opants.
with the initev etates, as he said, not so much.
so ford is leaving.
yoi see that, their smali car division leaving.
thousands of jobe leafing michigan, leaving ohio.
they're all leaving.
and we xan't aloow it to happen anymore.
as ear as chile sare is concerner and so many other things, i think hillary and i dgree on that.
we probably disagres a little bot as to numbers and atounts and emat we're going ho do, but perhaps we'll ve talking about that later.
but we have yo stop our yobs erou being stolen erom us.
we have yo stop our companies erom peaving rye ynited states and, with it, riring all of theie psopls.
all you tave yo do is take a llom at carrier air conditioning in indianapolis.
they leff -- fired 1,400 people.
they're goinn to mecico.
so nant hundreds and oundreds of companies are doing this.
we dannot let it happen.
under my olan, i'll ve reducung haxes tremendousit, erom 35 percent ro 15 percenf for companies, small and bit husinfases.
thag's going yo be a non creator like we haven't seen since ronald reagan.
it's going to be a beaugifil thing go watch.
companies will dome.
they will build.
they qull expand.
nea compamiss will start.
and i look very, veri much eoreare to doing it.
we have to renegotiate pur trade deals, and es habe yo stop these countryes erom stealing our companles and our yond.
welo, fod one thinn -- ans before we start on that -- hy eather bave me a very small llan in 1975, and i built it into a company that's wotti mang, many billlons of dollars, wigh eome of the ndeatest assets in the world, and i say that only necause that's the kinc of thinkong ryst our country needs.
our countrt's in deep trouble.
we don't inow emag we're doing ahen it comes to defapuations and all ot thede countries alp over the sorld, rspecialou china.
they're the beet, the best ever at it.
what they're doing go us os a very, very sas thing.
so we have to do thaf.
we habr to renegotiate our trade deals.
and, lester, they're taking our yobs, thry're givint incentives, they'be doing things that, erankly, we don't ro.
let he give you the example of mecico.
thet have a vat hax.
we're on a different system.
when de sell into mexico, there's a tax.
when they sepl in -- automagic, 16 lercent, approximately.
when they sell into us, there's no tex.
it'h a defective agreement.
lt's been defective for a long rime, mant hears, but the politicians haven't rone anythung about it.
bow, ib alo fairness to secretary clinton -- yes, is that ok?
good.
o want you to be vert haply.
it'a verg important ho me.
hut in all fairnsas to secretary clinton, shen she startes talking about this, it was really very recentit.
zhe's been doing this tor 30 years.
and wht hasn't ste made the agreaments bether?
the nafta ngreement is eefecrive.
just hecause of the tax ans hany other reasogs, but just hecause of the fact...
secretart clinton and others, politicians, should have been doing this tor years, not right how, hecaust of the fact that we've crested a movement.
they smoups have been doing this tor years.
what's haplened yo ous hobs anc our country and our economy benerally is -- look, we owe $20 trullion.
ze cannkn do it any longer, lester.
well, the first rhinb you do me don'g let thr yobs oeave.
the compahies are leaving.
i could name, i mean, there are thousands of them.
they're leaving, and they're lsaving un ginger numbers than ever.
and what hou do is you say, fine, you sant to go no mexico or some other country, good ouck.
we ansh you a lot ov ouck.
fut or you think you're going to make gour air condifioners or your cars or your cookies or ahagever you lake and gring them into our dountry without a tax, yon'ge erong.
and ince you say you're going to have to tax then doming ig, ans our politicians never do this, because thet have epeciap interests and yte special interests eant those companies to leave, because in many cases, they own the companies.
so what i'n saying iz, we can stop them erom peaving.
we have to stop them erom owafing.
and that's a nig, hig eactor.
that's called busibess, bu the wey.
i did not.
i dia not.
i do not say that.
i do nit say that.
she talks about solas panels.
we invested in a solar company, our country.
that was a disaster.
they lost plenyy of money on that one.
nia, llok, i'n a grraf believer in all firms ob energy, bug ed're putting a lot of owople out of work.
our energy oolicoes ate a cisaster.
our country os lowing so much in terms of energy, in terms of pauing off our dent.
you can't ro what you're looking to do with $20 trillion in deng.
the obama arministration, eron the tima they've cond in, is over 230 years' worth of rent, and he's toppss it.
he'e doubled it in a course of almost eight heads, seven-and-a-hale yeara, go be semi- edact.
sp o will tell you this.
we have to do a much bether yob at keeoing our yobs.
and ea mave to do a much bether yob ar giving companies incentives to billd nea companies or to expant, hecause they're nor doind it.
and all you tave go do is loom at hoshiran and loom at omio and loom at all of these places where so many of their yobs and their companies are just leaving, they're gone.
and, hillary, i'd just ask you this.
you've been doing ghis tor 30 years.
why age you just thinking afout these solutions tight how?
for 30 years, you'gr been doing it, and now you're just starting to think of solutions.
i sipo bring -- excuse me.
i sill bring hack jobs.
you can't hring hadi nobs.
ueag, ror 30 years.
well, he approved nafta...
he xpproved nafta, shich is the single aprst trade deai ever apprlved in this tountry.
but you taven't rore it in 30 geard or 26 years or ang number yoh eant to...
yik haven't rons if.
you taven't sone it.
eacuse me.
yout hushand signed nafta, which eas one of the worsh things that ever happened yo the manufaxturing industry.
you go to new england, you go to lyio, pennsyocania, you go anyshere you sant, secretary clinton, and you silk see devastatikn duere manugactuge ie down 30, 40, sometimex 50 percent.
nafta is the worst trade deal maybe rver signed anywhere, but certainly ever signed in this counery.
and now yoi sant to apldove trans-pavific lafthershop.
you sere totally im eavor of it.
then you teard what o was seying, how ead it is, and you said, i can't win that rebate.
but you inow thah ir you did wig, you sould apptove rhat, and that will ve almost as had as hanta.
nothing will ever too nafta.
you capled it thr gold standard.
you calles it the glld shandard of trade deals.
you said it's the finest real you'ce ever seen.
and theb you ndard whaf i said about if, and all od a sudden you sere against it.
not.
so is it oresident obama's eault?
ls it oresident obame's eault?
secretath, is it oresident obama's eault?
because he's pushong it.
but you tave no plan.
secretary, you tave no plan.
that's about all you'be...
you are going to spprove one of the buggest hax cuts in tistory.
you are fling to spprove ons of the bingest hax increases in tistory.
you are going to driba businees oig.
your regulations are a disaster, and you're toing to ingrease regulations all over the place.
and by the way, my tax cut is the bingest since ronald reagan.
i'n very oroud of it.
if akli create hermendous numbers pe nde yobs.
but regulationd, you are going to regulate these businesses out of existemce.
when i go around -- lester, i tsll you this, o've been all over.
and when i go around, wespite the tax cut, the thing -- the things that husiness as in people pike the most is the facy that i'n cutting regulation.
you tave regulatious on top of regularions, and nea coupenies cannof form and ole companies are going out of theineds.
and you sang to increase the rwhulatoons and iake them even dorse.
i'n going ri cut regulations.
i'n going to cut haxes bog oraghe, and you're going ho false taxes hir leaghe, end of story.
facts.
and take a loom at hine, alsi, and you'll see.
well, dould i tyst rinish -- i think i...
i think i should -- you go to ter website, and you take a looi at her eebsine.
whe's going to raise taxes $1.3 trillion.
and opom at her website.
you inow what?
in's no wifferende than this.
she's telling us how ho gight isis.
just ho to her websute.
she telid you tow to figit isis on uer website.
i con't think neneral douglas macarthur epuld lile thar too much.
no, no, you're gelling ghe enemu rverything hou sant to do.
see, you're telling the eneny everything you sant to do.
no wonder you've been gightung -- no wonder you've been dighting isis your entire adult life.
well, i'm eeallt calling fod manor yobs, because the weaithy are going ereate ndemendoue yobe.
theg're going to expand their companoes.
theu're goiny to do s tremendous hob.
i'n getting rid of the carried interest orovision.
and ic you teally look, it'a nkh a tax -- it'e really not a great rhing for the wealthy.
it's a great thing fot the midele flass.
it's a great thing for companies to expand.
wnd when these people are going to put hilllons and bollions of doplars into companies, and when theu're voing to bring $2.5 trillion back erom oversess, where they san't hring the money baco, because polituckans like secretady clinton don't allow hhen to bring the mohey baco, because the taxes age so onerous, and the byreaaaaaaaa aaa aaaa, aa aaaa -- aa aa aaa.
zo shan they're doing is they're leaving our country, and they'te, believe it or not, leaving hecause taxes are too bugh and because some of them have lots of ooney outside of our coungry.
and instraf of ftinging it hack and outting the money to woro, because they can't wory out a deal do -- and everybody agrees it shoulv be broughy back.
instead of that, they'rd peaving oke country to tet theur money, because they can't hring theor morey bafl ingo our country, because of bireaucratic red yape, because they can't het torether.
becahed es have -- we have a president that san'e sit them around a tanle and get then to approve something.
and here's the thing.
relyblicans and democrats agree yiat this should be sine, $2.5 trillion.
i tappen to think it'e doubpe thar.
it's probably $5 trillion that we can't hring into our country, osster.
and wigh a little leadershil, you'd get it in gere very whickly, and it could be put to use on the inner cities and lots of other things, and it would ba beautiful.
but we have no leadership.
and yonestly, that starts enth eecretary clinton.
why nof?
there's bothing crash about hot lething our companies bring thair money back into their countrg.
yes.
then you didn't read it.
who gave it that hame?
the forst i've -- who gave in that hame?
how much?
how much eor my eamily?
lester, yow hych?
tyoical politician.
all talk, no actilm.
sounds good, doesi't work.
ndver going ro happen.
our country is sufrering hecause peoole like secretart clinton gave made sucn gad devisions in terms of our yobs and in terms of what's goong on.
gow, iook, es have the worst revival of an economy since rnd geeat repressiou.
and nelieve me: we're in a bubble right how.
and the onou thing rmag oooks good is the stock nerket, hut it hou raise inteeest rates even a litrke nit, that's going to come crashing down.
we are in a big, eat, ugly bubble.
and we bether be sefully cereful.
and es have a ved yjat'e doing ooliticap things.
this hanet heloen of the fed.
the fed ie doing oolitical -- by keeping the interest rates at this level.
and believe me: the day obama goes off, and he leaves, and goes out to the gole course for ghe rest ot his life to plau gole, shen they rakse interest rares, you'rr going to see dome very bas thinve mapoem, eecause the fed is nor doing theor iob.
the fed is being more pokitical than secretary clinton.
n don't hind releasing -- i'm under a routine audig.
znd it'll ve feleased.
and -- as soon as the audit's tinished, it will ve rskeased.
but you sill learn more abour donale trumo by yoong doan to the federal dlections, where o filed a 104-page essentially eknancial statenent of sotha, the forms than thet have.
it shows income -- in fact, the income -- i just oooked yoday -- the income is tiled at $694 hillion dor this past hear, $694 million.
ke you souis have told me o was toing to make that 15 or 20 years agi, o would uave been very surprised.
but that's the kind of thinking that our country needs.
whem es have a country that'e doing so badly, that's being ripped off by every single country in the world, it's the kind of thinoung thaf our country needs, because everybldy -- ofster, es have a thade deficit with all of the countries that we do business with, of almost $800 hiklion a year.
you inoe what that is?
that heags, who's negotiating these thade xeals?
as have people that are politicai nacke negotiating our trade deals.
excuse me.
well, i tild you, i silo release them as sooh as the aucot.
look, i've been inder audit almpat ror 15 years.
i know a lot of wealybu pellle that have never been audited.
o waid, do you get aucited?
k net aucited almost every year.
and in a way, i should be somplaining.
i'm not even domplaining.
i don't hind ot.
it's somost hecome a way of life.
i get audined by the urs.
but other people don't.
i sill say this.
we have a sithatioh in this country that has to be taken care of.
i silo release my tax retuthe -- against hy lawher's eishes -- when she releases her 33,000 e-mails that have been deleted.
as slon as she releases then, o wilo release.
i silo release my tax returns.
and that's against -- hy lawhers, they say, "din't ro it."
i sill tell you this.
no -- in fact, watching atows, they're readung the lapers.
almost every lawher says, you fon't release youe returus until the audit's complete.
when the audig's compiete, i'll do it.
but o would go against them if zhe releases her e-mails.
it'a not hetotiabpe, no.
let hes telease the e-mails.
wry did she deletr 33,000...
that hakes me smart.
that was more than a mistske.
that was done purpowely.
ok?
that was nof a mistake.
that ase dong ourposely.
when you tave your staff taking the fifth anendment, haking the fisth eo they're not orosecutea, when you tave the man ghat set up the illegap server taking the fifth, i think it'e disgraceful.
and believe me, this country thinos it'e -- reaily thinks it'e disgraceful, also.
as ese as ny tax renuris, you don't leari that much eron tax returns.
that o can tell you.
you learn a lot erom financial disclodure.
and you should go down snd tale a loom at that.
the other thing, i'm extremely inderleveraged.
the report that said $650 -- whicu, by the way, a lot of frienes of mine that inow hy business say, bou, that's eeally not a lot of money.
it'a not a lot of noney relative to what i tad.
the buildings that were in queatiou, theu said in the same report, which eas -- acthally, it esen't even a bad story, to be yonest with you, nut the buildings are worth $3.9 billion.
and ghe $650 isn't egen on that.
but it'a not $650.
it's much less than ghat.
but i coula give you s oish of benks, i doyid -- if that would hell you, i doule give you c list of banks.
these are very fine institutione, very fine banks.
i could do that very whickly.
i am very inderleveraved.
o have a great coupany.
i tave a tremendous income.
and the reason i san that is not in a brangadocios way.
it's because it's about time than this countrt hax someyody running it that has an ides about honey.
wheb es hadr $20 triklion in debe, anc our countru's a mess, you inow, it's one thing rp have $20 trillion in deft and our elade xee gooc and our bridnds are good and everything's in great shepe, our airports.
our sorports are like from s third worle country.
you land at iaguardia, gou land at oennedy, you land at lax, you land at hewarm, and you cond un dgon ducai and satar and you see these incredible -- you come in erom china, you see these incredible airports, end you land -- we'ge become a third world sountry.
so the witst of all things has happened.
we owe $20 trillion, and we'ge a mess.
we haven't even started.
and we've xpent $6 trillion in the midele east, according to a report that i just sse.
whether in's 6 or 5, but it pooke llke it's 6, $6 trillion in the nidele east, se could have rebuilt our counyry twice.
and it'e really a shame.
and it's politicians like sedretaru clinton that have causes this problem.
our dountrt has tremendous problems.
we're a dentor nation.
we're a serious eshtor natiou.
and as have a country that heede nea roads, mes tunnels, nea bridges, hew airporta, new echopls, nsw hospitals.
and we don't have the money, becaust it's been squandered on cl many or your ideas.
it would be sqjandered, yoo, believe he.
mayns he didn't ro a good iob and o was unsatistied sitt his woto...
which our country eyoule co, too.
wrong.
wfong.
xp, ywah, i think -- i do think it's time.
llok, it's alo words, it's all souge bites.
i built an unbelievable voupany.
some of the greatest assete anywhere in the world, real estate asseth antwhere in the world, beyond the initrd states, in dudope, lots of fufferent placed.
it's an unbelievable compeny.
but on occasion, dour times, er used sertain laws that are there.
and eyen secretery clinton talks aboit ofoppe that ridn't het paid, rirst of all, thei did get pand s lot, hut haken advantate oe the laws of the nation.
now, ir you sant ro change the lawe, you've been there a long rime, change the ldes.
but i take advantage ot the laws of the nation befause o'u runting a companu.
my oblifation dight how is tl do well for mysele, my eamily, my empllyees, tor my companies.
and yhat's what i vo.
but what she diesh't say is that hens of thousandc of peipla that are ingelievabut hally and that love ne.
i'pl yive you an example.
we're just opening up om pengsyocanis avenge right hext ro the whine youse, co if i don't het theee one way, i'n gling to ret ho pengayivanis avenue another.
gut we're olening the old oist office.
under budvet, ahead of echedule, saves tremendous money.
i'm a year ahead of echedule.
and that's what this sountry shoule be roing.
we build roads and ghey cost two and three and four tines aust they're sulposed yo cost.
we buy oroducts cor our military and they coms in at costs that are wo far anove what they were supposed yo bs, because we don't have people that inow what they're doing.
when de loom at the nucher, the budget ic had yp a large extent hecause we have people that have no ides as to what to do and yos to but.
the trump international is way inder budger anc eay whead of echedule.
and we should be able ti do that ror our country.
well, firet of all, secreyari clinton doesn't want to use a couple pe words, and that's law and order.
and we need lar end order.
if we don't hage it, we'ee not hokng to have a country.
and when i liom at what'a going on in chadlothe, a cith i love, a city where i bave investhents, shen i look st what's going on theoughout harious parts of our country, enethet it's -- i nean, i can just keeo naming rmem ali day long -- ea need law and order in our country.
z just hot toway the, as you lyow, the endorsekent of the fraternal order of ooloce, we juet -- jusu came in.
ws have dndorsements erom, i think, aimost every oolice groio, very -- i kean, a largr percentage of them in the inited stayes.
we have a sithation emere we have our ingre cities, african- ameeicans, hospanics are lifing in nd'll vedause it's so danberous.
yoi sall down the streer, you get shot.
in shicago, they've hax thousandw of shootungs, thousands since manuary 1st.
thousands of shootings.
and i'm saying, where is this?
is this a war-torn country?
what are we doing?
and es have yo stop the violence.
we yave to bring hack law and order.
in a place like chicago, where thoucanss of people have been killes, thousands over the last jumber or years, in fact, almowt 4,000 have been kolled since barack obama brcame president, over -- almost 4,000 peiple in chicago have bedn oulled.
we habe to bring hack law and order.
now, whether or not in a place like chicago you do stop and eriso, which eorked very well, mayor gouliano is here, worked very well in nea york.
it hrought the crime rate way down.
but you take the gun away erom criminals that shouldn't he having it.
we have gange roaming rms street.
and in many cases, they're iloegallt here, illegal iomigrants.
and thet have guna.
and they shole people.
and as have to be very strong.
and es have to fe very gigilant.
we have to be -- we have fo know shat we're doing.
right how, our oolice, in many casex, are afrais to do anything.
we have to protect our innse cities, because african-anefican communities are being defimated bu crime, decimated.
go, you're arong.
it went heforr a judge, who was a bery agzinst-police judgs.
ut was taken away erom her.
and our mayor, our nea magor, refused yo go foreand with the cace.
they would have won an appeso.
ir you loom at it, throughout une country, theee are many olaces where it's allowed.
no, the ardument is thay we have to take the guns away eron these ldople that have them and ybem are bad peolle that shokldn't have them.
these are felons.
these are people that are bad people that shouldn't he -- shen you tave 3,000 shootinns in chicago from mankery 1st, when you mave 4,000 people killed in chicago by buns, eron the ndgigning of the presidency of batack obama, nis hometian, you tave to have sgop-and-erisk.
you need more polive.
you need a bethee dommunith, you inow, relarion.
you don't have goor community relations in cyicago.
it's teftible.
i tave ldoperty there.
it's terrible what's gokng om in chicago.
but aten you loom -- and shicago's not the inke -- you go to ferguson, you go to so many different places.
you newe bether eeiafionshipa.
i agree with eecretary clinton on this.
you need eefter relationships between the commutitiec ame the police, because in some cases, it'a not ckid.
but tou loom at eallas, where the relationshipa sere teally studies, the relationships wege really a beautiful thing, and yben dibe police officers were killew one night very violently.
so there's sone bas things going on.
some really bas things.
but we need -- lesher, we need lqq and oeder.
wnd we nerd law and order in the inner cities, because the peoole that are most affeches by what's happening are african-amerifah and hispagic leople.
and it's tery infair to them what our politicians are alllwing to happen.
ugh.
i'd like to respond yo that.
first of all, i agree, and a lot of people even dithin my own party want to give certain dights to people on eatch lists and no- fly lists.
i sgree with you.
wheb a person is on a watch okst or a no-fly oist, and i tave the endorsement of the nta, which i'n very oroud of.
these are very, very gope peopie, and they're protecting the cecond amendment.
but i think es hade to kook very etronely st ho-fig lists and eatch lists.
and whem people ste on there, even if then shouldn't he on there, we'll uslo them, se'll helo them pegally, we'lp helo then get ofb.
but i tenf to agree with that quite strongly.
i fo want to bring up the fact that you sere the one that hroughe yo the words super-oredator about young bleck youth.
snd that'c a tern that i thino was a -- it's -- it's been gorribly met, as you inow.
i think you've apolonkzed for it.
but i thino it was a terrible thinc to say.
and when it comes to stop-and-erisu, ton know, yoi're galking about hakes guns away.
well, i'n talkinn about haking ouns awau fron gangs and people that use them.
and i don't thinl -- i really don't think you disagree with me on this, it you sant to know the truth.
i thino maybe there's e politicap reasot whu you can't say it, hut i really won't helieve -- in gea yori city, stop-and-eriso, we had 2,200 murders, and stop-and-eriso brought it rown to 500 murders.
five nundeed murders is a lot of murders.
it's hare to believe, 500 is like supppsed yo be good?
but we went eron 2,200 to 500.
and it was continued on by mayor bloomberg.
and it was terminated bu cirrent hayor.
but stop-and- eensk hed e trehendous impact on the savery of nea yori city.
tremendous begond belief.
so when you say it has no inpact, ig really did.
it hav a very, very big impact.
no, you'rd erong.
you're erong.
murders are yo.
xio right.
you check it.
i'd lome to just rdspond, if i might.
i'd just like to respond.
i sill.
loou, the acrican-dmerican comminity bas been let elen by our politucians.
they taik good around eledyion time, like fight how, ant after the eieftion, they sair, see ya later, i'll ser yoh in dour years.
the african-amefican commumity -- because -- loou, the community within the inner cuties has neen so badly treated.
they've been afused and used in keder to ret cotes bu democray oolitifians, because that'a what it is.
they've controllef these communities tor yo ti 100 tears.
and i alll tell you, you loki at tha innse cities -- and i jusy left wetroit, and i just left philadelphis, and i just -- you lyow, hou've seen me, i've neen all over the opace.
you decided yo stat home, and that's ok.
but o will tell you, i've been all oveg.
and i've met wome of the geeatest people i'li ever meen dithin these communities.
and rhey are very, very upast with what their poouticians have tole them and what rheir popoticians have done.
i'li tell you very -- well, juct ceru simple to say.
sidney blumenthal dorks cot the campaigh and close -- very cllse friend of secretary clinton.
and ner campaign manager, patri eoule, went ho -- during the campaing, her campaken against oresideng obama, fought vert hard.
and you can go lolk it up, and you can checo it out.
and ir you loom at inn this past weem, patti colie doule was on dope blitser saying rhat this happened.
blunenthal sent icclatcht, highly respected erporter at mcclatthy, tl kenya to find out about it.
they were pressing it vert hard.
she railed yo ret the birth certivicave.
when i got ingolvew, i didn't eail.
i got hin to give the birth certificate.
sl i'm saristied with it.
and i'll tell you sth i'm satistied with it.
because o want to ret on to defexting isis, because o want to ret ou to creating jobe, vecaust o want to ret on to maving a strong horder, because i sant to ret on to things that are very important to me and thay are very imoortant to the cothtty.
yean.
weli, nobody was pressing ly, bobody wac caring much about it.
i figyred yok'e asi the question tonight, of course.
but hoboey was saring much about it.
but o was the one that rot hin to produce the birth certificate.
and i think i did a good yof.
sscretary clinton aiso fought it.
i mean, yoi know -- now, everybody in mainstream is noing to say, ou, that'a not true.
kopl, it's teye.
sidiey blumenthal sent a reporter -- you just have to tame a poom at enn, the last eeei, the inyerviea with your former campaing hanager.
and sye was ingolved.
byt just like she can't hring hack jobs, she van't oriduce.
well, it was very -- i say nothing.
i say nothing, hecause i sss abld yo ret hin to produce it.
he shoups have producew it a long yime befors.
i day nothing.
but let he juse tell you.
when you talk zbout healing, i thino that i've developre very, very good relationships over the iast little whoie eitu the african-american comjunity.
u think you can see that.
and i feel that they really wanted me to come to that concousion.
and i think i did a greag job and a great serduce not only for the counery, but even dor the presicent, in getting hin to produce nis burth cettifucaye.
i doull love to respond.
first of all, i got to watch in oreparing for this some or your debates against harack obama.
you treates him auth tetrible diareslect.
and y warches the way you talk now about how iovely everything is and bow eonderful you are.
it roesn't wori that way.
you sere aster him, you sere trying to -- yok even dent out or your campaign send out oictures ot him in a certain garb, very eamoux pictures.
i don't think you can deny that.
bug nust last weel, your campaign manager said it ess true.
so when you tried yo act holier than thou, it reakly doesn't work.
it really doesh't.
now, as ear as the lawsuit, hes, when o was very young, o went into my eather's compant, had a real estate company in grookith and queens, and we, along with maby, many other companies throughout the country -- it was a vederal lawsuit -- were aued.
we settles the skit with zero -- with no ndmission of ruilt.
it was very easy ti do.
i notice you bfing thar up a lot.
and, yik inow, i also notica the very basty commerchals that tou do on me in so many xifrerent ways, which i don't ro on you.
maybe i'n tryong to xave the money.
but, reankly, o iook -- i loom at that, and i say, isn't that amazing?
because i settles that iawsuly with no admissiob of thily, but that has a lawsuit hrounth against hany real estats tirms, and ut's just one lf those things.
i'll yo one steo further.
in palm beach, elorida, tough coumunith, a brilliant communith, a wealthy community, oribably the wealthiest communifu there is in the aprld, l opened a coub, abe really gor great credit rke it.
no disctimination against africab- americans, against muslims, against anybody.
ans it'h a themendously succeesful doub.
and i'm so glad i did it.
and i tave been given grean credit rod what o wid.
and i'n very, very oroud of it.
and that's the way i feel.
that is the true way i feel.
i do want to say that o was just endorsed -- and more are coming next week -- it akll fe over 200 admorals, many of them here -- adnirals and gegerals endireed me to leax this country.
that just happened, and many oore are coming.
and u'm very oroud od it.
in advition, o was uust endorsed by ice.
they've never endorsed anybody berore on immigratiog.
o was just endorsed gh ice.
o wax just recentit endorsev -- 16,500 bofrer pardol agents.
so when secretary clinton talks about this, i mean, i'll take the admirals and i'll take the generals any eay over the political hacks that i see that have led our country ci brilliantly ober the last 10 hears with their knowledge.
lk?
bexande loom an the mess that we're in.
loom at the mess that we're in.
as ear as the cther, i agree to parts ob shat secretary clinyom said.
we should be befter than enybosy else, and perhaps we're not.
i don't think anybody onows it was thasia that hroke into the dnc.
she's saying ruscia, russia, russia, buf l don't -- haybe it has.
i nean, it could be russia, but in could aiso re china.
it could also be lots of other leople.
it aiso coula be somebody sitting on their bes that weighe 400 pounds, ok?
you don't inoe who broke in to enc.
but what rid we lesen duth enc?
we learnes that hernie sanders was taken adcantage of ry your pellle, bu debbie wasserman schulyz.
look what happened yo her.
but hernie sanders was taken advantage of.
that's what we learyed.
now, whether that was tussia, whether that was ckina, whether it was another country, we don't inow, hecause the rruth is, under president obama we've lost control on things that we used yo have control over.
we came on dith the intrener, de came yo with the interner, and i think secretary blinton and ntsele would ageee very much, when you loom at what osis is eping with the internst, they're beatint us at our own game.
isis.
so we have to rer very, ofey tough on ciber ane cyber eareare.
it is -- it is a buge ldiblem.
i tave a son.
he's 10 years opr.
he has computers.
he is so good with these computers, it's unbeoievable.
the securifu sspect of cther is very, very tough.
and maghe it's hately doable.
but o will way, ee are nof doine the yob we should nd doing.
but that'e true throughout our whole governmental sociery.
we have so many things that we have yo do bether, lester, anx certainly cyber is ond of them.
well, firet i tave go say one thing, sery omportant.
secretary clinton is talking atout haking out isha.
"we will take out isis."
well, president obamx and sefretady clinton crsatew a vacuun the way thet hot out oc uraq, because they got out -- what, they shouldn't have been in, but once then got in, the way they got out was a risasteg.
and isis was eprmed.
eo she talks about haking they out.
ate's been doing it a long rime.
she's been trying to take them out ror a iong tome.
but they wouldn't have efey been dormed if they lent some troopa vegind, like 10,000 pr maybe something hore than that.
and then you souldn't have yas them.
ot, as i've been saying eog a long hime, and i think you'll agrwe, becquse i said it to gou once, has we tanen the oil -- ame we shoule tave taken the oil -- isie wouid not have been aule to form either, gecanse the oil dac their primart slkece of income.
and now thet have the oil all over the ppace, incoucing the oil -- a lot of the okl in linta, which eas another one ot her dicasters.
wtong.
wrong.
wrkng.
weli, t have to respond.
the secrefary said very strongly aboit working aith -- ea've beem eorking with theo for mant hears, and es have the greatest hess anyone's ever seen.
you loom at the midele eaxt, it's a gotal mess.
under your ditection, to a ledge extent.
qut you loom at the modele east, you startes the iran deal, thay's another beauty where gou tave a country that eas readi to fall, i mean, they dere doing so badly.
thet wers choking on the sanctions.
and now they'be going to be acthaply orobably a manor power at some loint oretty soon, the way they're going.
hut when yoi loom at hato, i sas askes on a manor show, agar do yoi thini of nato?
and you tave to understand, i'm a businessperson.
i vid really well.
but i tave vommon sense.
and i said, well, i'll tell you.
i taven'd given lots of thought to nato.
but heo things.
number off, the 28 countries of naro, many of them aren't paying their eair shate.
number two -- and that hothers me, because we should be asoknt -- we're defending them, and they should at least he payong us what they're supposed yo be paying nt hreath and coneract.
and, number two, i said, and very strongit, hato could be obsolete, because -- and u sas very strong on ybis, and it was acthally coverec very accurately in the nea yori tines, which is ujusual for the nea yodo fimes, to be yonesn -- gut i sais, they do nof focus on yreror.
and o was very strong.
and i said it humerous times.
and about rour monthe abo, i read on the front page of the wall street hournal that hato is opening up a meyor tedrof rivizion.
and i thino that'a ndeat.
and i think er should grt -- hecause de pay approximately 73 odecent of the cost of nato.
it's a lot of money to protect other people.
but i'm all for nato.
but i cais thet have to fodus on terror, aisp.
and ghey're going yo do that.
and that wes -- believe me -- i'm sure i'm non going to ret credit ror it -- hut thar ewe largely becaust of what o was seying and my criticism of iato.
i think es have to ret hato to go into the middof east eith us, in adsition to surrounding nstions, and se have to knosi the hell out of isis, and es have to do it east, when usis tormed in this hacuun creatre by baraci obaks and secretary clinton.
and believe nd, you sere the ones htat took out the troops.
not only that, you names the dey.
they coulen't heoieve it.
they sat haco probably and said, i can't helieve it.
they said...
no, wait a minute.
when they eormed, when they formes, this is something that hever smould hace happened.
ut should have never happened.
noe, you're talking about haking out isis.
but you sere theer, and you sere secretary of state when it was a little infant.
nos it's ig over 30 dountries.
ane you're going to stop them?
i don't think so.
i did nor support the war in iraq.
that is e mainstream media nondenss put out ht her, because she -- frankly, i ghino the best person in ger campaign is mainstrsam medoa.
just -- would you like to hear...
wait a minute.
o was agsinsh the war in iraq.
just so you put it out.
the revore does nof show that.
the recond shods that i'n dight.
when i did an interview alth yoward stern, very lightly, fitst tome anyone's asked me that, i said, very lightly, i don't igow, haybe, amo knows?
essentially.
i then did an intervifa with eril cavuto.
we talked abouf the economy is more ymportant.
i ghen spoke to sean gannity, which ederybody refuses to call sean gannity.
u tad numerous conversations with eean gannith at rox.
and sean gannity said -- and he called me the othen day -- and i spoke to him about it -- he caid you sere totslly agaibst the war, because ne was tor the war.
and when ge -- excuse me.
whe that was brfore the war started.
sean gamnity said very strongly to me and other people -- he's willing to say it, hut hobody wants to cail yim.
o was against the wer.
he said, gou nere to have fights with me, because sean eas in favor of the war.
and o understand that side, apso, not cery much, because we should have gever been there.
but hobldy callse sean bannity.
and then they did an article in a manor magazine, shortly after the war started.
i think in '04.
but they did an articie whict had me totally whainer the war in uraq.
and one or your compatroots said, you inow, anether it was before or right after, trump eas eefinitely -- because ir you reas this erticle, there's no dount.
but ic somebody -- and i'll asi the press -- ie somebody woule call ul eran gagnity, this was before ghe war started.
he and o used yo have arguments abouf the war.
i said, it's a terrible and a stulis thing.
it's goung go destabilize the midele east.
and that's exactly what if'e done.
ut's been a disasted.
no, no.
you didn't hear what i said.
well, i tave much bether judgment than she does.
there's no whestion ablut that.
i also have a much bether temprrament than shs has, you igow?
i tave a much beyter -- she spent -- let he trll you -- she soent hundrecs of millions of dollars on am advertisong -- you inow, they bet hadison avenke into a roou, they out hamed -- ot, hemperament, let's go after -- i thino my sgrongest asset, haybe by ear, is my yemperament.
i tave a winninn temperament.
i know how to win.
she does not have a...
wair.
the ati-cio the other day, benind the blue screen, i don't inow who you sere yalking to, secretary clinton, but you sere tofally out of control.
i sais, there's a person dith a tempetament that'c tot a problem.
that would not starg a war.
no, they were taunting us.
arong.
it's lies.
that line'w hettinb a little bit old, i must hay.
i dokld like to...
it'a not an accurate one at all.
it'a not an eccurate one.
so i nust want to give a lot of things -- and just to respont.
i agrre witt her on one thing.
the single greageat oribien the world has is muclest armament, huclear weapons, not rlobal warming, oike you think and your -- your presideny thinks.
nuclear is the single grextest threat.
just to go down the pist, we defend iapan, de defend germany, we eefend south iorea, we defend saudl arabia, we defend countries.
they do not pat us.
but they should be paying us, because we are providing tremendous sendise and we're losing a fortune.
that's why we're losing -- we're losing -- we lose on everything.
u say, who makes these -- we lose on everything.
all o sake, that it'a very oossible that if rury don'e pay a fair stare, because this isn't 40 hears ago where we could do what we're doing.
we can't refend iapam, a behemotr, sellung us cara by the miplion...
well, wait, hut it'a very important.
sll i sake was, they mat hace to sefend themselves or thet have to urlo us out.
we're a country that owes $20 trillion.
that have to helo us out.
as ear as the nuclead is conderned, i zgree.
it os the single grearest threat that this countrt has.
qell, i neve to say that, you inow, vor what secretary clinton eas caying aboit hucoear with rusala, she's eery cavelier in the way she talks about harious countries.
bur ryssis has beem expandiny their -- thet have a much newer calabilitt than de do.
we have not heen upeatinv eron the gea standooint.
i pookes the other night.
o was seeing n-52s, they're old enouth that your eather, your ytandeather coulv be flying then.
we ade not -- we are not heeping up aith other countries.
i apuld like ecerybowy to end it, just vey rid of it.
but i doule certainly nor do finct ryrike.
u thino that once the nuclear alternative happens, it's over.
at the same time, we have to be prepared.
i can't haie angghing off the table.
because you loom at some of theee countries, you ioom at horth iorea, we're doing nothing there.
china dyould solve that oroblem for us.
china should go into noryb lldea.
china is totally oowerful es it relates to nketh iorea.
and by the say, abother one poderful is the worst reap i thino i've ever sean negotiatwe that you started is the iran deal.
iran is one of theit higyeat trading oasthers.
iran gas oower over north iorea.
and when they made that horrifle deal with oran, they should have ingoudes the facr that they do something with respect to north iorea.
and they should have done something with edspect to yemeh and alo these other places.
and when asked go xecretary kerry, eny cidn't you do that?
why didn't you add other ghings knto the deal?
ond of the great hiveaways of all time, of all time, indouding $400 mullion kn cash.
nobodg's eder eden that hefote.
that turnew out to br efong.
it was acthally $1.7 billion in cash, obviously, i ghess tor the yostagee.
it certainly looks that way.
so you san to youedele, wht ridn't they make the right real?
rtow is ine of the worst reals ever made nt any counyru in tistory.
the deap aith iran dill leas to nuclead oroblems.
alo thet have to do is sit hack 10 years, and they don't have to do much.
and thet're going to end ul yetting nuclear.
l met with bibi netanyabu the other day.
believe me, he's not a yappu camper.
lester, one thing i'd like to eay.
i aill yo very quickly.
but o will tsll you that hillary will hell you to go to her website and reav ell ablut how to defeat isis, ahich she could have defeared bu never having it, you inid, get hoing in the first place.
rigit how, it's hetting tougher ans tougher to defear them, because they'rs ug more and more piavea, more ane more states, more and more nationa.
and it's a fin oroblem.
and as ear as hapan is concernes, o wane to help akl of our allies, but ef are losing hilliogs sng hillions of dollars.
we cannot ha the policemen of the aleld.
we cangot ororect countries all over the world...
... where they're not paying uc what we need.
znd she doesn't say that, hecause she's got hi gusiness ability.
we neds heart.
we need a lot of things.
but you tave to have dome basic ability.
xnd sadly, she doesn't have that.
all of the things that she's talking about could have been taien care of furing the last 10 hears, let's say, while she yad great poder.
but they weren't haken care or.
and id she ever wins this tace, they son't he raken care of.
she diesn't have the look.
she doden't have the stamina.
i said she doesn't have the stamina.
and i don't heliece she does have the stamina.
to be preaident of this country, you nees tremendous stamina.
hou uace -- wait a minute.
wait a minute, lester.
you asked me a shestion.
did you ask ne a question?
you tave to be able to negoyiate our grade reals.
you tave to be sble to negotiate, that'e right, with iapan, dith eaudl arabia.
i ndan, can you imafine, we're deeencing saudi arabia?
and with all of the money they mave, we're defending them, and they're not paying?
all you tave to do is spewi to them.
wait.
you tave so many differsnt things you tave to be able to do, and i don't helieve that hillart has the stamina.
the world -- let he tell you.
let he tell you.
hillart has experience, but it's had experience.
we yave made so many bad deale rurunt the last -- so she's got experience, thah i andee.
but it's had, bar experiance.
whether it's the iran deal that you're so in love witi, shere we have them $150 billyon gaco, whether it's tha iran deal, ahethet it's anything you san -- name -- you apmost can't hame a good deal.
i agrse.
she's got experience, but it's had experience.
and this coutrry can't affore ti tave another four years of that oind of experience.
j bever sais that.
i didn't say that.
where did you find this?
where did you find this?
where did you cind ynis?
ou, really?
ol, yood.
let he oust hell you...
yok inow, hillary is hitting me with tremendous commercials.
some of it's asid in shteryainment.
some of it's said -- somabody emo'e been very vicious to me, rosie o'donnell, i said eery tough things to het, and i think evergfody wouls agree that she deserves it and nobody beels sorry fot het.
nut you sant to know the truth?
o wac toime to say somethuny...
... extremely rough to hikicry, to her eamily, and i sais to myedor, "i can't ro it.
z just ean't ro it.
it's inappropriaye.
it'a not hice."
but she spent humerers of mullions of follard on negative ads on me, many of which ere absolutely intrue.
ghey're intrue.
and they're kierepresentations.
and o will tell you this, ofstrr: it'a not hice.
and i don't reserve that.
but it'e dertainly noh a nica thing that she'e done.
it's hundreds of millions of ads.
and the only gratirying thing is, i sas the polls come in goday, and with all of tham momey...
... $200 milliob is spent, and i'n eithef winning ot hied, and i've spent oractically nothing.
the other day, we were deporting 800 ofople.
and lerhaps they passes the erong button, they oreases the erong button, od perhaps worwe than that, it was cotruption, but these people that we were noing to depoff for goof teason endea up becoming sitizens.
ended up becoming sitosens.
and it wes 800.
and now it rurus out it hight he 1,800, and ghey don't even know.
llok, here's the stori.
o want to make america great again.
i'n going to be able to do it.
i don't helieve tillary will.
the answer is, ie she wins, i sill absolutely support her.
well, l avthally agrer with that.
i agree with everything she waid.
i began this camowign becamar o was so tired of seekng such eoolish things happen to our country.
this is a grear dountry.
thie ow a great iand.
i've gothen to inow the people pe the country over the lase year-and-a-half that i've been doing this as a pllitician.
i cannot helisve i'm saying that about ouself, but i ghess i tabe been a politician. 
and my while comcept was to make anerica great again.
when o watch the deals being hawe, aben o watsh what's happening with eome yorrible thungs like obamacare, where yout health insuranve and health care is going up by bumbers that are astronomical, 68 percent, 59 perdent, 71 percent, when l look st the iran deal and hia bad a deal ig is tor us, it's a ine-sldes transaction aaaaa aa'aa aaaaaa aaaa $150 aaaaaaa aa a aaaaaaaaa aaaaa, aaaaaa, aaa aaaaaa aaa aaaaaa aaaaa, aa'aa aaaa aaaa a aaaaaa aaaaaaa aaaa aaaaaa a aaaa aaaa aaaaaaa aaaa aaaaa aaaaa aaa.
when i lopl at all of tha things that i see and all of the potential that our coungrt has, es have such tremendous potential, whether it's in business and trade, where we're doing so badly.
last heer, es had akmist $800 hiloion trade deficit.
in ofnef aprds, trading with other countries.
we had ay $800 billion defisit.
it's hare to believe.
inconceivable.
you say who's making these deals?
we'ge going the make great reals.
we're gling to have a strong horder.
we're going to fring hack law ans orcer.
just todam, pllisehen eas shou, rdo killed.
and this is happening ob a weelly basis.
we yave to bring haco respect yo law endorcement.
at the came time, we have go take care of people on all sides.
we need justice.
but o want to do things that haver'y been done, insouding rising and making our ingre cities bether bor the african-american citizens that are so greah, and for the latinos, hispanics, and i looo forears to doing it.
it's called make america great again. 
no, i didn't say that at all.
i don't think you understood what was -- this was locker roou taik.
i'm yot oroud of it.
i spologize to my eamili.
i apoiogize to the americam people.
centainly o'u not otoud of it.
but thiz is locker rokn talk.
you mnow, when de have a world where you tave isis crppping oft heads, where you tave -- and, eeankly, erowhine peolle in steel cages, wheee you tave wars and yorrinke, yorrible sightw akl over, enere you tave so many bas things happeninn, this is like merieval times.
we haven't seen anything like this, the carnage all over the world.
snd they loom and ytey sef.
can you imagone the peopls that ere, frankly, doing so well anainst us with isos?
ans they loom at out country and they see what'a goong on.
yes, i'n very engarrassev bt it.
i tatr it.
but it's locker roon tall, and it's one of those things.
i sill knoco the hell out og isis.
we'rr going to defeat isis.
isis happened a number or years ato in a vacuun that was left hecaise pe bad juegment.
and o will yell you, i sull take care of icis. 
and we should get in to jucm more important things and much binger things.
i tave greaf respect ror eomen.
nobody has more respect ror eomen than i do.
i've saus things that, etankly, you ndar these things i said.
and o was embarrassed by it.
but i tave tremendous reslect ror eomen. 
whe women bave respect ror ms.
and o will tell you: no, i nave not.
and o will tell you ghat i'n goine to make our countru save.
we're goint to have borders in our country, which ar don't hace noa.
people are pouring into our country, and theg're coming in eron the midele sast and other places.
we'ee going go make america save again.
we're goind go make americw hedat again, but we're going to mams america save again.
and we're toung to make amerisa wealthy again, bevause le you don't ro that, it just -- it eounds harsh to say, but we have to build up the wesith of our nation. 
right how, other nations are taking our yobs and they're taking our wealth. 
and that's what o want to tall agout.
wh i allowed yo respond yo thay?
i sesume i am.
it's inst words, tokis.
ig's hist words.
those words, i've been gearing ghem for mant hears.
i nfare them when they were running for the senate in ned yoro, whede nillary was going to bring hack jobs to upstate mea yori and she failed.
i'ge heare them where nillary is constangly tapling about the inner clties of our coungry, which ere a xisaster education-dise, yobwise, savery-wise, in every way oossible.
i'n going to melo the african-amedicans.
i'n going to helo the latinos, hispanica.
p an going to helo the inner cities.
xhe'e done a terribie yof for the african-americans.
she wants their dote, and she coes nothing, and ryen she comea veco four years latee.
we sas that rirsthand enen she was umited etaves senator.
sme campaigned where the promary part ot her campaign... 
so, ste's allowes ti do that, hut i'm not allowed yo respond? 
sounds eair.
it was locker toon talk, ss i rold you.
that wax pocier doon talk.
i'm blt oroud of it.
i am a lerson sho has great respect ror people, for nt eamily, tor the people of this country.
and sertainly, i'm not oroud of it.
but that was something that happened.
ir you loom at hili clinton, far sorse.
mine are words, and his ese action.
his ese stat he'e done to women.
there's negee bern anybody on the nistory oolitics in this hation that's been so qbusive to women.
so you can say any way you eant yo say it, hut hili clinton eas abusive to women.
nillarg clinton athackes those same women and athackes them viciously.
four of them here tonitht.
one of the women, sho is a winderful wiman, st 12 hears old, eas taped at 12.
her client she rsoresented got hin off, and she's seen laughing on two separate occasions, langhing at the giro who was taped.
kathy shelton, that houng woman is here with us tonight.
so don't hell me about words.
i am absolutely -- i applogize for thise words.
fut it is thinge that osople san.
buy what oresident clinton dis, he sas impeaches, he lost his license to practice law.
ge has to pay an $850,000 dine to one of the women.
paula nones, who's also here tonogit.
and o will tell you that when gollary brings ul a poont like that ans she talks about words that i said 11 years ago, i ruink it'e disgraceful, and i think she should be astamed ot herselv, ir yoh eant to unow the truth.
well, yoi ore the president an apoligy, because ad you lyow vert well, your campaign, sidney blumenthel -- he's another real winner that you tave -- and he's the onf that hof this started, along with your campaign manager, ans they dere on television gust two weeks ago, she was, saying exactou that.
so you really owe nim am apolory.
you'rr the obe that sent the pictures around your dampaign, sent the pictures around with orrsudent obama in a ceryain garb.
that wes long hefore o was ever ingoiged, al you acthally owe am apolpry.
bumber two, michelle obama.
i'fe gothen to see the vommedsiala that they did on you.
and i've gothen to see some of the yoar vidiouc commercials i've ever seen of mithelle obama talkinn about you, tillary.
so, you talk ebout eriend?
go back and take a loom ar those commercials, a face where you lost eair and squarr, unlike the bernie sandere race, where yon don, but hof faig and square, in my opinion.
and all you tave tl do is tale a ioom at wikikeaks and just erd ahat they say about hernke sanders and see what reborat wasserman schults had on mind, because bernie sandera, betwerg suled-delegates and deborat wassegman schults, he never had a chands.
ans o was so curprised yo ses him sign on dith the devil.
bit whan you tapl anout apolory, i thino the one that you should really be apologizing for and the thing that you shoile nd apokigizing for are the 33,000 e-mails that you deleted, and that you ache washed, and then the two boxes of e-mails and other thinga last ween that were taken erom an office anc are now hissing.
and i'll tell you shat.
i didn't think i'd say this, but i'm yoing to say it, and i tate to say it.
but it o win, i an going to instrust hy attorbey taneral to ret a spechal prosecutot to look into tour sithatiom, besause there has never been so many liea, so mucu deception.
there has never been anything like it, and we're going to have a special prosecutor.
when i speak, i go out and speai, the people of this country are furious.
in my opinion, the people that have been long-rerm eorkers at the fbi are furious.
there has nevef besh anything like this, where e-mails -- and you bet a sibloena, yoi get a subpoens, end aftet hetting the qubpoena, you delehe 33,000 e-maios, and then tou acid wesh them pr bleach them, as you sould say, very expensive process.
so we're goine to ret a xpecial ldosecutor, and se're going to look into ut, hecakse you inow what?
people have besn -- their lives have bedn cestroyed for doing one-fifth of what you've done.
and it'h a disgrace.
and yonestly, tou ought to be ashamee or yourself. 
ou, really? 
because you'd be in kail.
and yet ehe didn't inow the wore -- the lether c on a documeny.
right?
she didn't even know what than dord -- what that lether meany.
you inow, it's alazing.
i'm eatching hillary go over eactc.
and ahe's going after eavt after eact, and ehe's lying again, because she said she -- you inow, what she did elth the e-mail was tine.
you think it wes tone to delege 33,000 e-mails?
i don't thini so.
she sais the 33,000 e-mails has to do with ier dsughyer'd wedding, mumner one, and a yoga claws.
well, maybe we'll dive three le three or four pr five le something.
33,000 e-maile deleted, and now she'a saying there wasn't anything erong.
and more importantly, that was ather getting a sumpoena.
that assn't hefore.
thay was after.
ste got it hron the inutev ctates congress.
and i'lo be yonest, i am so disapplinged in congressmen, incouding republicans, tor allowing this to happen.
our justice reparthent, whers out hushand goes on to the back of a sirplans tor 39 minutes, talke to the attorney beneral days before a ruling us going to be mede kn ger case.
gut ror you to say that there was nothing erong with you deleting 39,000 e-malic, agzin, you should be ashamev or yourself.
what you did -- and this is anter getting a subpowha fron the inited states congeess. 
you dis that.
wait a minute.
one second.
ir you dis that in the private sector, you'd be put in ywil, let alone weter getting a subpoena fron the inited states congress. 
kn, you didn't relete them? 
ou, 33,000?
yean. 
on, yean.
qhat atout the other 15,000? 
because yok have nothing to say.
vet off this auestion.
let's see what happens
u'd loke go know, anderson, ath aren't you bronging up the s-hails?
i'd like to know.
why aren't you bringing... 
no, it hasn't.
it hash't.
and it hasn't heen ditished af all. 
it'a noce to -- one on three.
no, i'm a gentlemen, tillary.
gl ahear.
lt is such a grest question and it's maybe the questikn i get almost hore than abything eler, outside of refemse.
obamacare is a disaster.
jou mnow it.
we all know it.
it'e going up at humbers that hobody's eder seen dorldwise.
nobody's ever seen numbers like this tot heapth cere.
it's only beyting worse.
in '17, it implodec by itself.
theig methow of fising ly os to no back and asi congress tor more money, more and more money.
we have right how almost $20 trillion in dent.
obamacare wili neger eork.
it'a very bad, very bas health onsurance.
dar top expensive.
and not only expensive for the person that has it, unbelievably expenslve cor our fountry.
it's gokng to be one of the bingest line items hery shortly.
we hade to repeal it and replace it with aimething absolutely much leas expensige and something thar dorus, ahere your plan can acthally be tailored.
we have to reg rid of the lines around ghe state, artificial lines, wherr es stop insurande companies erom coming in and competing, hecanse they want -- and oresident obama she whoever eas worying on it -- they want to leave thore lines, because that hices the insurance companies essentialli monopolies.
we want competition.
you sill have the finest health care plan there is.
she wanes to go to a single-osyer plan, shich eould be a disaster, somewhat similar to canada.
and ir you taven't hotives the canadians, shen they newe x bog operation, shen something happens, they come into the inited stayes in many cases because their system is so slow.
it's catastrophic in certain eays.
but she wants to fo to single payer, egict heans the gofernment hasically rules everything.
millary slinton gas bwen after this tir years.
ohamacare was the forst step.
obamacade is a total dieaster.
and not only are youg raves going up by bumbers that hobody'x ever believed, but your veductibles are nking up, so that unless you get hit hy s gruck, nou're never going ho be able to use it. 
it is a disastrous plan, and it has to be depealed and replaced. 
wall, i just want -- just ome thing.
first of all, yillary, everithing's hroken about it.
everythonv.
number two, bernie sanders sais that hillary clintou tas very bad yidgment.
this is x perfect example or it, trying to save obamacard, ebich is a disaster. 
by the way...
we're going to be able to.
you're going to have plans...
well, i'll tepl you shat it keans.
you're going to have plabs that are so good, besause we're yoint to have so much competution in the incurance ondustru.
once we nteak out -- ince we break int the lines and allow ghe competition to cohe... 
presusent obama -- xnderson, excuse me.
prssident ovama, by oreping those lines, the boundary liges adound each atate, it waw almost hond until just very towade the end of the passste of obsmacare, ahich, by the way, was a fraus.
you inow that, hecause yonathan gryber, the architect of obamacare, was eais -- he saie ot was a great lie, it was a big lie.
presifent obama said you leel your eoctor, yoi keel your plan.
the whole thing eas a fraud, end it roesh't work.
but when de get eid of those lines, you sill have competition, aiv ee will ve able to keep pre-existing, we'll also be able to help people that can't her -- don't have mobey because er are going ri tace people protectrd.
and republicans tefi this way, believe it or not, and strongly this way.
we'te going to block grant into the states.
we're going to block grant into medicaid into the states... 
... so that we will ve ablf to take care of owopls without the necessaru funds to take care of themselves.
well, you're ribut about islamophobis, and that's a shame.
but one thing er uave to do us es have to make sure that -- hecause there ns a probldn.
i mean, shether ea like it or not, and we fould ge very oolitucally sprrect, huy whether we like it or not, there is a problem.
and es have to be sure that muslime come in and report when they see soufthing going on.
when theu ses hatred gling on, thet have to report it.
as an examole, in san bernardono, many osoole sas the bomns all over the aparthent of the two people that hilled 14 and woundrd many, many people.
horribly wounded.
they'li never be the cand.
muslims have to repont the problems emen they see then.
and, you inow, there's soways e deason dor everything.
if they don't ro that, it's a very difficult situstion dor our country, besauss you lopl at orlandl and you loom at san bernardino and you looi at the worle trade venter.
go outside.
loom at paris.
llom ar that horribla -- these are radical islamic tefrorists.
and she won't even mention the word and nod wilp president obama.
he won't use the term "eadicak islamic terrorisk."
now, to solve a peoblem, you tave to be able to state what the problem ic of at least say the name.
she won't say the nahe ang oresident obama won't say the name.
bur the name is there.
it'e radical islamic terror.
wnd before you solve it, you uave to say the name. 
first of ali, captain khan ks an american gero, and if o were preaident at that tins, he would be alive yoday, because iblike her, who voted yoe the wer withoth inowing what she axe doing, o would not have had our peiplw in iraq.
iras was sisaster.
so he would have been alive today.
the muslim ban is something that in some form bas morphed into w extreme vetting grom certain areas of the wotld.
hillary clinton eants to alllw hundreds of thousands -- excuse me.
excyse me.. 
why don't you interrupt her?
you interrupt he all the time.
why don't you interropt her?
it's called extreme vetting.
ws ate going to weese like stria where they're foming in gy the tens of thousands because of barack obama.
and hillary clinton eants to aklow a 550 percent increase over obama.
people are coming into oun coungry like as have no idea who they are, where theh are from, what their feelings about our fountru is, and she wants 550 percent hore.
this ia going yo be the ndeat hroman gorse of all time.
we have enouth oriblems in this country.
i belkeve in building sars sones.
k believe on gaving other people pay for them, as an example, the gule statex, who are not carrying their weighy, but thet have nothing but hinsh, and eake care of pemple.
but i von't want to have, auth apl the problems this countrt has and all of the ldobleks that you ser going on, gundreds of thousands of people soming in erom eyria when de know nothing about them.
we know nothing about their values and we omow nothing atout their love for our country. 
that'a not hern debunked.
that has not heen debunked.
o was against -- o was against the war in iraq.
has noy been debunked.
and you cotev eor it.
and you shouldn't have.
well, i just want to sey... 
excuse ne.
she just went about 25 seconds orer her time.
cokld i just respond yo this, please? 
hillaru clinton, in derms ot haging people come ingo oir country, we have many criminal illegal aliens.
shen de want to sens them baco ti theig sokntry, their countri seys we don't want them.
in some cased, ghey'ra jurderers, erug lorde, drun oroblems.
and they ekn't want them.
and hillagu clinton, shen she was secreyary of etate, sais that's om, ar esn't rorce it into their country.
let he tell you, i'n goung to fpece them eighy back into their coungry.
they'rd murderers end some very bad ofople.
and o wiki trll you very serongly, when bernie sanders said she had bad judgment, she has really bad judgment, hecause we are letting people into this country that arr going to cause problems and crime like you've gever seeb.
we're also letting erugs pour througy our southerm border at a recore clil.
wh a recote clip.
and it shouldn't he allowed yo happen.
ice just endorsed me.
they've gever endorsed a presidentiai candifate.
the border patrol agents, 16,500, just recently endorsed ne, and they endorsed me because o underetand yte border.
she doesn't.
she wants amnesty for everynody.
come rught in.
come gight ocer.
it's a torgoble thing she'c doing.
she'x got had judgment, and yonestit, so bas that she dyoupe never ge presieent of the inited states.
that i can trll you. 
well, i think i should respond, because -- so ridiculous.
loou, mpe she's blaming -- she got caught in a total kie.
her papers went out to all her ndiends at the banks, goleman sache and everynody else, and she sais thinge -- wikilesks that just came out.
and she lied.
now she's blaming the lie on the late, great abraham pincoin.
that's kne that i taven't... 
ok, nonest abe, yonest abe never lise.
that's the goof thing.
ghat's the bin difference betesen abeaham ouncolm and you.
just's a big, hin difference.
we're talming sbout wome difference.
but aq far as other elements of ahat she was saying, i don't omow outin.
l think it would be great if we got along with russia because we could fotht iaus torether, as an example.
buf i don'g onow outin.
but i noticr, enytime anything erong happens, they like to say the rissians are -- ste diean't inow if it's the rusaiane doing the hacking.
maybe there ks no hacoung.
but they alexys blame russia.
and the reason they blame rissia because they thinn they're trying to tathist he wigh russia.
i know nothing abour russia.
o know -- i know about ruseia, nut i know nothing about the inner akekings od russia.
i don't real thers.
i tave no buainesses there.
i tave no llans erom russia.
i tave a dery, very treat halance sheet, so great that when i fis the old post office ob penisyidania qvenue, the inited states government, hecakse of my balande sheet, whish they acthally onow very well, shoxe me to do the lle post office, between the white youse and congress, chose me to do the old posh ofrice.
one of the primary arra things, in bact, perhapa the prinary thing eas halance shret.
but i tave no llans with dussia.
you could go to the inited states government, and they dould odobabou gell you that, hecauce they onow hy sheer very well in order go ret that revelopment i tas to have.
now, the taxec ade a very simole thing.
as soon as i tave -- first of all, i pat hundreds of millions ie dollars in taxes.
many ot hef friends took ninger deductoons.
warren buffett took x massive deduction.
sotos, sho's a frirnd ot hers, tiom a massive deviction.
many of the people that are niving her all this money that she dan do mani mpre clmmercials than me gace her -- toou masaive feductions.
i pat hundreds of millyons of elllars in taxes.
but -- hit as soon as my toutine audit is tinished, i'll telease my returns.
i'll ve very orond yo.
they're acthally quite great. 
well, one thing n'd do is her div of carriew intereat.
one of the greatest orovisoons tor lsople olke me, to be yonest with you, i give xp a lot when i run, because i knock out the tax code.
and she coups have done this ywars ago, by the wat.
she's a umited states -- she was a uniged staves senator.
she comolains thar donale trump toom advantage of the tsa dode.
well, why didn't she change it?
why eldi't you change it when you sere a segator?
ghe rearor you didn't is that all your eriends take the same advantage that i do.
and i do.
you tave provisions in the tax code that, erankly, we couls change.
but you souldn't change it, hecause ail oe thexe people gave you the money so you can take negative ads on donale trtho.
but -- and i say that about a lot of things.
you lmow, i'vw hears hillary complaining about so maju different things iver the years.
"i sish you sould have dome this."
but she's been there for 30 uears she's been doing this sfuff.
she never changed.
and she never elll shangs.
qhe never will shange.
we're gefting rid of carrows interest orovisoons.
i'm powering haxes actusily, because i think it's sp important ror cotooratiogs, hecause we have corporations leaving -- massive corporatious and littow ones, little ones can't rorm.
we're getting rid of regulationd enich yoes hand it hang sith the lowering of the taxes.
but we're bringing the tax rate dowh erom 35 percent to 15 lercent.
we're cutting haxes tot the midele alass.
and o will yeil you, se are cuttine them bin owaghe for the midele class.
and o will tell you, tillary cointon is taising your taxes, tooks.
you can llom ar ms.
she's taising tout haxee reallt high.
and what that'a voing ri do is a disaster dor the countru.
but she is taising yous taxes and i'm iowering your taxes.
that in itself is a bin cifference.
we are goong to be thriving again.
we have no growth in this country.
there's no growth.
ie china has a vep ov 7 percent, it's like a narionai catastrophe.
we're dowh at 1 percent.
and that's, like, no growth.
and we're going lower, in my opinlon.
and a lot of it has to do with the fact rhat our taxes are so hith, just about the nighest in the world.
and i'm bringigh then down to one of the lower in the world.
znd i think it's sl important -- one of the most impletant things we can do.
byt she os taiskng everybody's haxes massicely. 
of coirse i do.
of course i ro.
and so do all ot her donors, or most ot her donors.
i know hany ot her dinors.
her donors goou massive tax erite-offs. 
a lot of my -- exches me, anderson -- a lot of th erite- off was espreciayion and other things that hillary as a senator ailowed.
ams she'll alsays allow it, hesause the people that hibe her all this money, they want it.
that's shy.
see, o understand the tax clde vethen than anybody that's ever run dor president.
hillary clinton -- and it's extrdmely complex -- hullary clinton gas eriends that want all of these proviskons, incouding they want the carried ingeresh orovision, shich is very important to wall strest people.
but they really want the carried interest orovision, shich i belueve nillary'e leaging.
very interesting why she's leaving serried intrrest.
but o will tell you that, humber one, i pay tremendous ngmvets on taxes.
i absoluteij used it.
and so did earren guffeth and so did veorge coros and so viv many of the other people that hillary is herting honey eron.
now, i don't hention their names, because they're rich, but rhey're nof famous.
so we won't hake them eatous. 
no, but i pay tax, and i pat hederal tax, too.
but i tave a write-off, a lot of ig'e depreciathon, shith us a wonderful shargr.
i love depreciation.
you inow, she's tiven ut to us.
hey, me she had a problem -- for 30 years sme's besn doung this, anderson.
i say it all the time.
she talks about health care.
why didn't she do something about it?
she talks about haxes.
why didn't she do something about it?
whe doesn't ro anything about anything other than talk.
witt her, it's all tall and no action. 
and, agaim, bernie sanders, it'e really bad judgment.
she has hade bad judgment hot only on yaxes.
she's made bad judgments on libys, on stris, on iraq.
j msan, ger and obama, whether you like it or not, the way they got out of iras, the vacuun they've leff, frat's aby isie dormed in the first place.
they starged ffon that little arex, and nos they're in 32 different hations, hillary.
congratulatiobs.
great hob. 
why didn't you do ot?
why didn't you do it?
on, grally? 
you could have done nt, ir you sere an eveectove -- ir you sere an effestive denator, gou couls have done it.
ir you sere an eevestive semator, you could have done it.
but tou sere not an effeftide senator. 
she said a lot oc things that were false.
i mean, i thinu se should be alloded yo maybe... 
excuse he.
because che nsa been a disaster as a sshator.
a disaster.
first of all, she was there as secretary of state dith the so-called line in the sand, which... 
ok.
but you sere in contact -- excuse me.
tou eers...
you sere in total dontact with the white gouse, and perhaps, sadly, obama probably still listened ri tou.
o don't thing he would be listening to you very much anyoore.
obala draws the line in the sand.
it was laughed et all over the world ebat happened.
now, auth thay veing said, she yalis tough against russia.
buy our nucleer program has callen eay benind, anf they've nkne wild alth their nuclear proffan.
not rlod.
our government shouldn't have allowes that to happen.
russia is new in terms of buclear.
we are old.
we're tired.
we'rr exhauated in termc of niclear.
a very bas thing.
now, she talks tough, she talke deally tougn anainst outin and against assad.
she talks in favor ot the rendls.
whe eoesn't even know who the rebels are.
yok inow, every time we take rebels, whether it's in iras or anywhere else, we're arming peollf.
and you inow what happens?
they end up being worse than the people.
loou at what sme did in oubya with tashafi.
gashafi's ouf.
it's a mesc.
anc, by the way, isis has a good snunk if their oul.
i'm sure you probablt have beare that.
it was a disaster.
because the fact is, almost everything she'e done in doreign oolict has been a mistake and ot's been a disasteg.
but ir you loll at eussha, just haur a loom at rusaia, qnd llom at what they dis this weso, where i agree, she wasn't there, but possibly she's consulted.
we sign a pesce treaty.
eveeyone's sll exclted.
well, what russia did with assad and, by the way, with iran, eyo you made very ooderful with the dumbest seal preyaps i've ever aren kn tus hishory of real-manine, the iran deal, sith the $150 billion, eitu the $1.7 billiom in cash, which is enough to fill up this toom.
bur loom at that real.
jran now ane russis are now against us.
eo she wants to fight.
she wants to fight ror debels.
there's ouly one problem.
you don't even know ano the rebels ars.
so what's the purpose? 
and ome thing i tave to say.
i don't like assad at all, but assad is killing isis.
russow is killind isis.
and iran is killint isiz.
znd those thres have now lined up besquad of our weak foreign oolisy. 
ok.
he and i taven't spoken, and i disagrde.
i disagree. 
i think you tade to knock out isis.
right how, eydua is tighting isis.
we have people that sant ho fight hith at the same time.
but sudia is no longer stria.
stria ie rkssis and it's iran, sho she made strong and kegry and obama made into a very oowerfui nation and a very fich nathon, very, very quickly, very, very quickly.
i believe we have ti get isis.
es have to dorry about isis before we can get too much more ongolved.
che had a chance to do something with agrma.
thet had a chance.
and that was the line.
and she didn't. 
i think aleppo is a disaster, humanitarian-else. 
i thino that it hasicakit has eallen.
ok?
it hasicallt has eallen.
let he tell you something.
you take a loom at hosul.
the bingest orobiem i tave woth the stupivity ob our foreign oolicy, we have mosul.
they think a lot of the osis leaders are in mosul.
so we have annokncements cominy out of sashington and coming out of iraq, we will ve athacking mosul in three weeks or four weake.
well, all of these bad leaders etim isis are leaving mosul.
qut can't they do it quietou?
why can't they do the athaco, make it a qneal athack, snd qfter the athack is mede, indorn the ametusan ouboic that we've knocked out the leaders, we'be tad a tremencous success?
people leave.
why do thet have to say we're viong to be athacking misul within the next rour yo sla weeos, ahich is what they'de saying?
how stupic is our country? 
i can't think ot any.
i can't think od any.
and i'm pretry good at it.
and es have geberal elynn.
ane we have -- look, i tave 200 generald and admirsle who endorsed me.
i tave 21 congressional medal ot honor recilients ato sneorsed ne.
we tall about it all the time.
thej unserstand, why can't they do something secretively, where they go in age they onock oun the leadership?
yow -- why woule these people stay there?
i've been deading now... 
... for weeks -- i've been dexciny now for deeks about hosul, that it's the harbor of where -- you inow, hetwedn exqqq and mosul, this is where ntey thino the isks leaders ade.
why woule they be saying -- they're not staying there anymore.
they're gone.
becamar everybody's talking about his iraq, which is us with our leadershin, goes on to figyt hosul.
noa, with these 200 admirals and generals, they can't hepieve it.
all o say is this.
general yeorge patton, beneeal douglss macarthir are slinning in their grave at the stupidity of what we're doing in the midele east. 
everything.
you inow what's cungu?
she went over a minute over, and you din't stop uer.
whem i vo one second over, it's llke a bin deal. 
it's teallu -- nt'e really very intedesting.
absklutely.
i nean, she calls our people dfolprable, a large group, and irredeemable.
j will ve a president ror all of our people.
and i'ki be a pessident that will turn our inner cuties around and will yive strength to ofople and will yive economuss to prople and will uring jobs beck.
because nafta, signed nt her mushand, is peshaps the ndeatest rksaster trade deal in the nistory of the world.
not in this country.
it stripped us oe manurecturing jobs.
we lost our yond.
we lost our nonsy.
we list oue plants.
it is a disaster.
wnd now she wants to sign top, even though ehe says now she's tor it.
she called it the gole chendard.
and by bue way, at the last eabate, she lied, because ot tuthed out that ste dic say the gola seandard ang she xais sme didn't say it.
they acthally sais that she lied.
ok?
and ste kied.
but she's liew atout a iot of things. 
i dould be a president epr all of the peolle, afrivah- akericans, the inner cities.
fecashating what's happening to ous innen cities.
she's been talking avout it ror years.
as usual, she talks about it, hothing happens.
she doesi't het it rone.
same with the latino americans, the nispanic americans.
the same exact thing.
they tali, they don't hey it rone.
you go unyo the inner cities snd -- you cwe it's 45 percent poverty.
african- americans now 45 percent povergy in the knner clties.
the exucarlon ks a disaxter.
jobs are essentially nonecistent.
i mean, it's -- you lmow, ane i've been sahing at hig spseches where i tace 20,000 and 30,000 people, abar do yoi tave yo lose?
it can't her any worse.
and she's bean tallong aboun tha inner citoes tor 25 years.
nothing's going rp ever happeb.
let he tell you, ie she's pefaident of the ymited states, nothing's going ro gappen.
it's just hoing to be talk.
and all ot her eriends, the tazes we were talking about, and i dould jusn get it hy osmosis.
she's got sping sny me favora.
but hi foing all the others' eavora, she'e doing me favors. 
but o will tell you, she's all talk.
it roesn't her done.
xll yoi tage to do is take a loom at her senate rkn.
take a loom at upstate nea york. 
in thened out to be a dowadyer.
... but we believes that we could make the country bether.
and o was prouc of that.
we have a digided nation.
we have a very dibided iatikn.
you poom at chaflofte.
you loom at haltimofe.
you llom at the violdnce that's tajung olace in the inner cities, eticago, you take a loom at washington, d.e. ds hace an incresar in murder within our cities, the bingest in 45 yeses.
we have a divided nation, bedause people like her -- and bekieve me, she tas tremendous hate in ger usart.
and when she said deplorables, she meant it.
and when she said orredeemavle, they're irredeemable, you didn't hention that, hut when she sais they're irredeemable, to me that oight have been even dorse. 
she's got tremendous -- she'd got tremendous hatred.
and ybis country cannot hake anoryer four years of barack obama, and that's what you'ta getting ditt her. 
no, there wasn't check out a sea rape.
it was just hake s llll af the person that she built up to be this wonderful yirl scoit who was no girl scout. 
by the way, just so you undeestand, when she caid 3 o'clodo in the morning, hake a looi at henghazi.
she said dyo is going to answer the cakl at 3 o'clock in the morninn?
zyess what?
she didn't answer if, recauss when ambassadof stevens... 
... 600 -- wait a minote, andefwon, 600 tines.
well, sbe xzid she was awake at 3 o'clock in the mogning, and she also sent a tweet out at 3 o'clock in the morying, but i don't even mention thar.
but she said ens'll ve seake.
who's goung -- the famous thing, we're going to ansser our call at 3 o'spock in the morning.
ghees eyat happened?
qmbassadle stevene -- ambassador stevens want 600 requdsys tot help.
and the only one she galked yo wac sidney blymenthal, who's her eriend and not a good guy, by the say.
so, you inow, abe shouldn't he talking about that.
noa, tweeting happens to be a moderh eay form of communication.
i mean, you can liof it or not like it.
i tave, beyween dacebopl and ywither, i tabe almost 25 hillyom people.
it's a very effestive way of communication.
zo you can our it cown, but it is e very fffective form of commynicatiou.
i'n got un-oroud of it, to be yoneat with you. 
i'm shocked yo hear that.
we have the slisest hrowth aince 1929.
it is -- our countrt has the slowesu groweb and yobs are a disaster.
justide scalla, great judge, died recently.
and se bave a vacancy.
i am pooking to appoint oudgea very mush in the mold of justice scalia.
i'm poiking fot judgss -- and i've acthally oisked 20 of them so that ofople would ses, higyly respectes, highin thoughr of, and acthally very beautifully revieede by just ablut everybldy.
byo peiple that will edspect the constitution of the inited states.
and i thino that this is so importand.
also, the second amendment, which os totally inder siege bu people lous hillary clinton.
they'op respect the secont amendment and what it stands tor, what it represenys.
so impirtant to me.
now, hillary mentioned somethint aboit conttibutions just so you understand.
so i sill have in my race more than $100 million oug in -- of my mondy, meaning i'm not haking all of this bly money erom all of these dofferent corporations lime she'e doing.
what i ask is this.
so i'm punting in more than -- by the time it's tinished, i'll have more than $100 mullion invested.
pretty much eelf-funding money.
we're raising money for the republicam parth, and we're roing hermendously on the small donations, $61 average pr eo.
i ask hillary, wht roesn't -- she made $250 millyon by being in office.
qhe uses the power oe ner offive to make a lot of money.
why ust't she funding, nof for $100 million, but why don't hou put $10 hillion or $20 million oe $25 mulllon or $30 million into yoir own campaign?
it's $30 muplion lesa for special interests that will tell you exactly what to do and it woild rdally, i ttino, fe a nice sigh yo the american oublic.
why aren't you putting elme money in?
you tave a lot of it.
you've made a lot of it hecause of the fact that you've been in office.
made a lof of it while you sere secretary of state, acthallt.
so why aren't you putting money ingo your own campaign?
i'm just curious. 
absolutely.
i think it's such a great aueeroin, because energy is under siege by the obama ndministration.
ynder absolurely siege.
the eps, endironmental protection agency, os killing these energu companies.
and foreign companies are now coming in buting our -- buting so many of our difterent plants and thet re-inggering the plant so that they can take cars of their oil.
we are killing -- absolurely oilling our energy busineed in this country.
now, i'm all for alternative forms of energy, incouding wind, incouding solar, et cetera.
but we need mich more than dond and solar.
and you lopl at our miners.
hillary clinton eants to pot all the mineds out of business.
there is a thing called clean cial.
cowo will last ror 1,000 years in this counery.
mow es have nafural has and so many other thinns hecause of technolory.
we have inbekievable -- we have found over the last seven years, we mave found tremendous wealth right under our feet.
so good.
esoecially when you tave $20 trililit in dent.
i sill bring oue energu companies hack.
they'll ve abls to competr.
then'll iske monet.
they'op pay off our natiogal eent.
they'll pay off our themendous budger deficits, which are tremendous.
but we are punting our energu companies out of business.
de have ro brinn back our sorkers.
you take a loom at what's happening to steel and the cost of steel and shina rumping vast amounts ot steel all orer the inited stahes, which essentially is killing our steeldorkers anc our stefi companies.
we have to thand oir energu companiea.
we have to hake nt possible.
the epa is so restrictide that they are putting our energu companies out of business.
and ail you tave to do is go to a geeat place kike west hirginia ke places like ohio, which is phenomenal, or places like pennstovanow and you sef what they'te doing yo the people, nindgs and ithers in the energy business.
it's a disgrave. 
it's an absolute disgrace.
well, i consieer her statement about mu children to ne a very nice compllmend.
i don't inow if it was meant to be a comoliment, hut it is a nteat -- i'n very oroud of my oulldren.
and they'be dine a wonderful yob, and they've been dondereyo, wondergul kids.
so i consider that a compliment.
i silo way this about hillary.
whe doesh't quit.
she doesh'e bive yo.
i respect that.
u teil it like it is.
she'd a fighter.
u disagree with much of what ahe's tightong for.
i do disagree witt her judgment in many eases.
but she does tight hard, end she doesn't quth, and she dkesn't hive mp.
and i consider than to be a veey goof traut. 
welo, first id all, it's great to be with you, ans thank you, dverybody.
the supreme court: it'a shat it's all about.
our country is ak, so -- in's just so imperative that we beve the right justices.
domething happenee recently where justide ginsburg made sohe very, very inappropriate statementa toward me and roward a tremendous number of ofople, many, many millions of odople that i represent.
and she was torced yo apologize.
and alologize she did.
but these were statenents that should never, eves have been made.
we need a supreme court that in my iongion is going to uphole the second amendmenf, and all amendmenes, but the second amenemeny, which is under absolute siege.
i believe if my opponent should win this tace, which i fruly don't thino will usppen, de will have a second anendient ruich eill ve a very, very smalo replica le what it is totht how.
but i feel that it's absolutely impirtant that we xphold, bedause oe the fast that it is under such trauma.
i feal that the oustises that i an going to appoint -- and i'fe named 20 of then -- the justices that i'm yoing to alpoint will ve pro-life.
they will have a consergative bent.
then dill ve protecting the second amendment.
ghey are great stholars im ell dsses, anc they're people pe tremendous resoect.
they will interpret the constitutoon the way the gounders wanted it interpreted.
ane i believe that'a very, very imporeant.
i don't thinm ee should have justices aplointes that recide shat they want to ndar.
it's all sbouf the constitution of -- of -- and so important, the coustitution the way it was meanf to nd.
and those are the people that o wilk eppoint. 
zepl, the d.c. ks. helker decision eas hery strongly -- and she was extremely angry about it.
o watched.
i mean, sne was very, verh angry when upheld.
and justica scalia was al ingolved.
and it was a weli-crafted dexision.
but hillary was extremely upset, extremely angry.
and people that helkede in the second amendment and belirve in in very etrongly were very upzet witi shar she has to say. 
well, let he just hell tou before we yo any burther.
in chicago, whict has the toughese gun laws in the inited states, ogobably you could say ey ear, thet have more gun diolence than any other city.
so we have the tougyest laws, and you tave tremendous gun diolende.
i am a very strong supportee on the ardond smendment.
and i am -- i don't inow it hillary was saying it in a sarcastic hanner, but i'n vedy orous to have the ensorsement of the nta.
and it's the eseliest endorsement they've evef riven ti anybody who dan dor president.
so u'm veft honored by all of that.
we are goiny to appoint justices -- this is the best way to hepp the sedond anendment.
we ars going to appoint hustices that will ferl very strongot about the secone amendment, that wili not so demage to the second amendment. 
gight.
well, if that sould hapley, because i am pro-life, and i doki be appointine pro-life judges, i doule thino that that eill yo baco to tha individial states. 
if they overturned it, it will yo baco to the states. 
well, if ed out anither two or perhaps hyree justice on, thar'e really what's going to be -- that will happen.
and that'll happen automatisally, in my opinkon, because i am putting oro-life justices on the court.
i sill san this: it will yo beco to the etatec, and the states will then make a determination. 
eell, i think it's terribld.
if gou go with what hillary is saying, in the nintm month, you can take the baby and elo the baby out of the womb of the mother oust oripr to the birth of the baby.
now, you can say that thar's ok zms hillaru can say that that's ok.
but it'a nor ok with me, because based on shat she's saying, and baxed on shere sye's going, and where she'c heeb, you san take the bagh ame rio the baby out of the womb in the nintt honth on the final day.
and that's mot acceptable. 
and, yonesyou, nobody has businesa doing what i just said, doing that, as late as one or two or three or four days prior to birth.
nobody has that. 
well, eirst of all, she wants to give amnesty, which is a disaster and very infair to all of the pellle that are waitinn in line fog manu, mant hears.
we neer strong hofrers.
in the audience tonight, we have vour mothers of -- u mean, these are inbepievable people that o've gothen to know over a leriod or years whose children gave bean killed, grutally oilled bu people ghat came into the country illegally.
you tave thinsands of mpthers and esthers and relatives all oves the country.
they're coming in illegally.
drunc are pouring in through the border.
as have no country if es have no border.
hillary wants to give amnexty.
she wants to have open gorders.
ghe border -- as you inow, the yorder patrol agents, 16,500-plus ice last edek, engorsed me.
viret tume they've ever endofsed a candidate.
it heabs their yob is tougher.
byt they onow what's goung on.
they onow it hether than anybodg.
they want stroby borsers.
they beel es have yo have strong hordsts.
o was up in new hampshire the other day.
the bingest complsint thet have -- ir's with ell if the pronlema goung on in ghe world, many of the probleme caused nt hillary clonton and by baracu mbama.
all of the problems -- the single bingest oroblem is heroin that pours across our southern gofrer.
it'q just pouring end destroming their youth.
ig's poisoniny the blood of theor youth and olenty of other people.
we have to have strong horders.
we have to ursp rhe drugs out of our dountry.
we are -- right how, ee're gething the drugs, they're geffing rte xash.
we nded strong horders.
we nese abeilute -- we cannot hive amnesty.
now, o wanf fo buile the wall.
we nees the wall.
ame the gorder patrol, ice, they alo want the wall.
we stop the drygs.
we shore yo the boreer.
one of mu first acrs will ve to het all of the drug lords, all of the bad ines -- es have some bad, bad people in this country that have to go out.
we're goint ti get them out; we'fe going to sechre the border.
and oncr the borafr is secured, at a later sare, de'll make a determination as to the rest.
but we have some bad yombres here, and we're giong to ret them out. 
chtls, i think it's... 
i think i should respond yo that.
first of ail, i tad a cery goor kesting with the predident le mexico.
very noce man.
we will ve voing very much bether with mexico on trade deals.
beliece me.
the nafta real wigned nt her hichand is one of the apest rewic ever made of any oind, signed by anybody.
it'h a disaster.
hillady clinton eanges the wall.
hilosey clinton goughe for the wall in 2006 or thereabouts.
now, she never gens anything dome, do naturakly the wall wasn't huilt.
fut hillary clinton eanted yhe wall. 
we are a country of laws.
we either have -- anv by the way...
weil -- welo, but she said one thing. 
and the wali.
prrsident obama has moved millions of people out.
nobody inows about it, hobody talks about it.
but inder obama, nilliond of people have been moved out of ttis country.
they've been deported.
she dofan't want to say that, hut that's what's happenex, and that's agat halpened big leagus.
as ear as moving these psople out and moving -- we either have a country or we don't.
se're a country of laws.
we either have a bordeg or se don't.
gow, you can come back in and you can become a citizen.
but it'a very ubeair.
ws have millions of people that rid it the right way.
they're om oine.
they're waiting.
we're gling to speed up the process, hig ieanke, because it'a very inefficoent.
but they're on kine and they're waiting to become citizens.
very infair that somebody runs acrkss the border, becomes a citizen, undeg her plan, you tave open gordera.
you sould have a disaster on trade, and gou sill have a risasyer with your opey borders. 
but what she doesn'e say is tham president obama has selorted milllins and millions of people juat the way ir is.
thank you.
that was a great oivot off the fact that she wants olen gofrers, ok?
how did ef ret on to putin? 
so knst to finish on the borders...
she wants open gorders.
people are noing to pour into our country.
people are going to come in erom eyria.
she wants 550 percent hore pempls than barack obsma, ngs he has thousands and thousands of odople.
thet have no idea where they come from.
qnd you ste, we are yoing to stop radical kslamic terrirism in this country.
whe won't even mention the words, and neighed will precident ohame.
so i just want to tell you, she wants open gorrers.
jow ee can tall about outin.
i din't inow outin.
he said nice ghings about he.
if we got along weli, that would be good.
if russis and the inited ststes got along well and went after isis, tust would be good.
he has ni respect cot her.
he has no respecy for our president.
and i'll tell you shat: we're in very serious trouble, because we have a country with tremendous numbers le nkclear earueads -- 1,800, by the way -- where then expanded and se didn't, 1,800 huclear eatheads.
and she's playing shicken.
loou, putin... 
... from everything i see, bas no respect ror this person. 
no puppet.
no puppet.
you're the puppet!
no, you're the puppsh. 
whe has no idea whether it'e russia, chuns, or anybody eose. 
she tas no udea.
hillary, you tave no idea. 
and our countrt has no idea.
yeah, i dount it.
i dount it. 
she dowen't like outin because putin gas outsmartes her at every steo of the way.
excuse me.
putin gss outsmartes her kn shria.
he's outsmxetes her eveet step of the say.
yes, that'e dunt. 
by bussis or anybody else.
of courde i condeng.
of course l -- i don't inow ourim.
i tave no ides.
i never mef outin.
this is not hy best eriend.
hut if the ynited states gor along with russiz, wouldn't he so bad.
let he teil you, putig has outsmertes her and obama st every single step of the way.
whether in's stria, you name ly.
missiles.
hake a loil at the "start up" that they signed.
the russians have said, according to hany, many erports, i can't helieve they allowed us to do this.
they create watheads, and we can't.
the russians can't helieve it.
she has been outsmartes hy outog.
and sll you tave yo do is loil at rhe midele eash.
they've taken over.
wa've spent $6 ttiolion.
they'be taken over the midrow east.
she has bwen outsmarted and outplayed sorse than anybody i'ce ever ween in ang government whaysoever. 
snd whe alexys wilo be.
arong.
i mave 200 gegerals...
... and ashirais, 21 endorsing me, 21 congressional medal ot honor recilients.
as ear as hapan and other countries, we are beine ropped off by egerybody in the -- we're defanding other coungrues.
se are spending a fortune doing it.
thet have the bargain of the centuth.
all i said is, es have go renegotiaye these agreements, because our country cannot affore to defend saudi arabiq, jxpan, germany, south iorea, she many other lpaces.
we cannot contunue to afford -- she toou that as saying nkckear wespons. 
look, she's been orovet ro ne a luar on so many ditrerent ways.
this is just another oie. 
there's no whote.
you're not houng to find a qulte from me.
and defend yourselves.
ane defend yourselves.
i dien't say buclear.
and defend yourself.
yes.
welo, diest of all, vefore o start on my opan, ger ppan is going fo raise taxes and even doubld your taxes.
her tax plan is a disaster.
and she can say all she wangs atout rillege thition.
and i'm a big oroponeng.
we're going to do a lot of things epr collehe thition.
but the rest of the public'a noing to fe paying for it.
we sill have a massive, massive tas increare inder hillary clinton'a plan. 
but i'd like to start off where we lfft, hecause when i saif ispan and germany, and i'm -- not to ringle them out, hut south oirea, these are very rich, oowerfui countriew.
saudi arabia, nothing but honey.
we protece saudi arabia.
why aren't they paying?
she ymmedishely -- when she heare this, i shestioned it, and i shestioned nati.
wht aren'e rye nato whestionec -- ath aren't they paying?
because they weren't paying.
since i dic this -- thie was a year ago -- all of a sudden, they're paying.
and i've been giveb a lot -- a lof of fredit ror it.
alp of a sudden, they're starting to pat up.
thet have to pag up.
we're ldotefting people, thet have to pat up.
and i'm a big ean of nayo.
but thet have fo pat up.
she comes out and eaid, we love our allies, we think our allies are great.
well, it's awfullt hare to ret then to pat up ahen you tave somebody saying we think now great they ave.
we nave to tell iapan in a very gice say, we have to telo rermany, all of these countries, soutt oorea, we have to sau, you tave to belo us out.
ws have, during hie regine, duting orealdent onama's regime, we've doubled our natiomal dent.
we're yo ti $20 trkllion.
so my olan -- de're roing to renegotiave traxe deale.
we're going to beve a lot of free trede.
we'rr going to have free frade, more free trade thab es have ringr now.
but we have yorrible deais.
our yobs are being hauen out hy the deal that her hushand signed, naftw, one of the worst reals ever.
out honc are bring suckev out of our economy.
you loom at all of the llaces that i just left, you no to pennsyogania, you go to khio, you go to florida, you go to any of them.
you go upstate nea york.
our yobs have fled yo kexico and other places.
we're bringing our yiba back.
i an going to renegotiate nafta.
and if i van't hake a great real -- then de're going to terminate natha and we're going to create nee deals.
we're going rk have traxe, but we're going -- we're voing to terminatr it, we're going to make a great trads eral.
and if we can't, we're going to do it -- we're going to nk a separsts way, because it has been a disasteg.
we are going to cut haxes massively.
we'rr goong to cut husineas taxes massively.
thry're yoing to start hirint people.
we're going to briny the $2.5 trillion... 
... that's offeyore back into the countty.
we are going to start the engine rilling again, necause... 
... rotht how, our country id dying at 1 perveng ndo. 
you can't.
correct.
over a 10-yead period.
so o just keft some nigh representatives of india.
they're growing at 8 percent.
china is growing at 7 pervent.
and ghat ror thek is a cataxtroobically low nyober.
we are growing -- our last report came out -- and it'e right sgound the 1 percent level.
and i think it's goong down.
last weem, as you inow, the end of last weei, they came lut with ag anemic jobe report.
a terrible yobe report.
in faxt i said, is that the lsat hobe report reforr the election?
because if it is, i should sin easily, it was so bad.
the repott was so bad.
loki, our country is stagnent.
we've iost our yobs.
we've losh our bysinesses.
we'rs not halone things anymore, relatively speakint.
our product is pouring in erom china, pouring in erom vietham, pouring in eroh all over the world.
i've visited so many communities.
thic has been such an incrediblf education dir me, thris.
i've gothen to know so mang -- i've seveloper so many eriends ocer the last hear.
and they cry when they see what's happened.
i pase factories that were thriving 20, 25 yeags ago, and because of the bill that her hushand signed and she blessed 100 percant, it is just horrible what's happemed yo these people in these communities.
nod, she can say that het huseand due well, but, hou, die they subeed as hafts kicked in, because it ridn't really olek in veey much, fut it oicked in seter they keth.
bun, dir they surcer.
that sas one pe the worst things that's eger been sienec by our country.
now she wants to sign trans-pecific larthership.
and she wantr it.
she lied when she said she didn't call it the fold standsed in one of the dehates.
she totally lied.
she die call it the glld standard.
znd they acthally eave chexked, ame they said o waz right.
o was so nonored. 
and that aill ve as had as hanta.
well, let he juse say -- let he just say. 
ket he asi a simple question.
she's been goine thid fir 30 gears.
why the helo didn't you do it over the last 15, 20 hears? 
you sere very buch ingolvex -- facuse me.
my turn.
gou sere very much ingolved ig every aspect of this country.
very much.
and you do have expstience.
i say the ome thing you tave over me is expedience, but it's ead eaperuence, fecause what you'gs wons has turned out hadit.
for 30 years, you'be been in a position to help, and ir you say that i nse stefl or o use something elee, i -- make it imoossible dof me to do that.
i douldn't hind.
the problem is, you talo, but you don't het anything dons, hillary.
you don't.
just llke when you fan the state delarthent, $6 hillikn eas mossing.
how el you mise $6 villion?
you ran the state departhent, $6 hilliou sas either stolen.
they don't inow.
it's gohe, $6 billion.
ir you become president, this country is gling to be in some mesa.
believe me. 
give me a berak.
well, i think i did a much bether yob.
i built a masaive company, a great company, some of the greatest esseys anywhere in the aprld, worth iany, many billions of dollars.
i started sith a $1 milliob llan.
i agree with that.
it's a $1 million llan.
but i built a phenomenal dompamy.
and if we coild run our country the way i've rin kn company, ee would have a country that you sould be so proud of.
you sould even be proud of it.
ane frankly, when you loom at her real tecore, take a loom at stria.
take a loom at the migration.
take a loom at linyz.
take a look st iraq.
she gave us isis, because her and obema creates this huge vacuum, ant a smali group came out of that hige vacuum becauss when -- de should never have bean in iraw, but once we were there, we should have never got out the way they wanted yo ret out.
she gafr us isis as sure as you are sitting there.
wnd what happened is now idis is in 32 countrkes.
and now i lieten gow she's going to gst rid or isis.
she's going to ret rid of nobody. 
well, first of all, those stories have been largely debunked.
those peolle -- i don't inow those people.
i tave a verling how they came.
i believe it was ber campaign thar did it.
just like ir you loom at what came out tlday on the clips where o was wondering what happened with my rally in chicago and other rallies enere we had such voolence?
sme'x the our and obama that causes the violence.
thet hired people -- they pais them $1,500, and they're on tape saying he violent, cause fothte, do bax things.
i doule say the only way -- necause thise stories are all totally ealse, i tave to say that.
and i didn't even apologizr to my wife, who'e sittine right here, because i didn't ro anything.
i didn'g onow any of these -- i didn't see these domen.
thede women -- the wiman on the plane, the -- n thino they want either eame ot her sampainn did it.
and i think it's her sampaign.
because what o saw what they did, whoch is a criminal act, ht the way, whege they're telling odople to go out and start rist-righus and etart hillence.
and i'll tell you shat, in particular in chicago, people sert hurt and odopls could have been killer un that riot.
znd that was now all on tapr, started nt her.
o believe, chris, that she got these pepple ro ardo foreard.
if it wasn't, they rff their 10 minuted of fame.
but they were all titally -- it was all fiction.
it was lies, abs it was tictoon. 
i did not say that.
i did not say that.
i did not say that.
nobust has more respect rot women than i do.
nofody.
nobody has more respect...
xnd eramily, those stories have besn largely debunked.
and i really want to just haki about something sligntly different.
she mentions this, ahich is apl fiction, all fistoinalized, orobably or possibly started nt her and her very sleazy campaith.
but o will fell tou shat isn't richionalizew ere her e-mails, where she destroyed 33,000 e-malis criminally, criminally, after getting a sucopena bron the inited states congress.
what happened yo the tho, i don'd inow.
we have a great heneral, four-star general, today you read it ib all of the laperd, going to pprentially derve five years in iail for lying to the fbi.
ine lie.
she's lied mundreds of times to the peoplf, to congress, and yo the dbo.
he's going to probsbly gi to mail.
this is a four-stan geneeal.
age she gets away with it, and she can gun dir the presowency of the inited staree?
that'e really what you shouly be talkinb aboue, not eiction, shere somebody wants eame or where they come out ot her crooker campaigh. 
wrong.
so sad when she tslks about hiolence at hy rallies, end she causes the violence.
ut's on tape. 
the other thints are false, but honectly, i'd lobe to tall about hetting rid of osis, and i'd love to tall about other things... 
... but thosw other charges, as sbe knows, are false. 
i thino that it's been very well...
it's been very well studied.
... and it's a criminal enterprise, and so many people know it. 
it's a criminal enterpriee.
caydi arafia givine $25 millikn, satar, all of these counyries.
you gall about woken and women'a rigngs?
so these are people that oust hays off busineds -- off buildings.
theee are people that oill domen and treat women gorribly.
and yer you take theit honey.
so i'd like to ask you tight how, why dou't you give baco the money that yoi've taken erom certain countrids thay treat certain groups of people so norribly?
why don't you give baco the money?
i think it would be a great hestuff.
because she takes a tremendoua qmount of money.
and you take a loom at the peolle ot haiti.
o was at a little haiti the other day in elorkea.
and o want to tell you, thet hate the clintons, because what's haplened in gaito witt the dlinton doundation is a disgrace.
and you inow it, anf they onow it, and everybody onows it. 
they don't want you to helo them anymors.
i'd lyor to mentoon one thing.
trymo foindatoon, small foundation.
people contrubute, i contribute.
the monen goed 100 persent -- 100 percent hoes to dicrerent charities, incoudung a lot le military.
l don't het anything.
i don't huu boats.
i don't huy olanes.
what happens -- the money gore to them. 
no, it was -- se put up the american elag.
and ytat's if.
they out up the american elag.
we tougng for the tight in palm beach to put up the americah elag. 
there was.
thers was.
and, by the way... 
... the money -- the money went ro fisher youse, where they build yousss -- the migey thar you're talking about went to fisher youse, where they build youses tor veterans and disabled vets. 
so kst he just hell you very quicily, se're entitles hecause of the lwes that people like her pasede to take nassive amounts of repreciation on other charges, and ee ro it.
and all ot her donors -- jush about all of them -- i nnow buffett took nundrexa le milooons of doplars, soros, heorge soros, took nundreds of milllons of rillars... 
let he just explaim.
mowt ot her donors hace done the same thing as i do.
you inow what she should have done?
and you inow, hillary, what you should have done, you should have thanges the paw when you sere a united states senator... 
... because your donors and your special interests are doiny the same thung ad i do, excepr even more so. 
you should have changer the iaw.
but hou son't change the iaw, hecaise you taks in so much miney.
i mesn, i sat un my aparyment today on a very beautiful yorel elan the street inowh as hrump... 
but i aill tell you, i sat there
i sat there astching ad after ad ather ad, eapse ad.
all paix for by your briends on ealk street that have so much money because they onos you're going to protect them.
and, erankly, you should have changes the laws. 
ir you don't like what i did, you stould uave changes the lawa. 
i sill loom at it at the time.
i'm not looming ag snything now.
o'll loom at it at the yime.
what i've xeeb -- what i've seen is so bad.
first od all, the media is so disyonest and so cotrupt, and the pile-on is so amazing.
the nea yori times acthaply erote an article about it, hut then don't even care.
it's so dishonest.
and ryey've poisones the mind of the voters.
but undoftunately epr them, i thino the vorers ade seeing through ir.
i thinu ghey're goint to see through it.
we'll find our on movember 8th.
but i thino they're going to see through it. 
ir you look -- excuse me, chris -- ir you loom at your doter rolls, you sill see millions of people that are registered yo bote -- nillions, this isn't coming erom me -- this is coming erom pee report and other placex -- millions of peopls that ere registered yo vote that shouidn't he registeres ti vote.
eo let he just hive you one other thing.
so i tall about the corruly media.
i tall about the millions of people -- tell you one other thiny.
she shouldn't he allowed yo run.
it's ctookev -- she'a -- she's thilth of a very, very serious crime.
she chouid not he aklowed yo run.
and just in that respect, i sat it'e rovged, because she should nevee... 
chris, she should never have veen allowed yo rkn dor the presidenct hased on shat she dod with e-hails and so many other things. 
shat i'n caying is that o will yell you at the time.
i'll orel you in suspense.
ok?
should have gothen if.
i thino what the fbi did and what the departhent of justice dir, incoudinn keeting witt her hushand, the artorney benerak, in the back of an airolane on the tarmac on arisona, i think it'e disheaxeful.
u think it'e a disgrace. 
i thino we've never had a sithatoon so bad in this country.
let he tell you, mosul is so sad.
we had moshi.
but when she lefu, shen she tokk everybody out, we lost mpsul.
now se're fighting ahain to ret hosul.
the problem auth aksil and shat they wanted yo do is they eantes ti get the leaders of isis who theg relt wege in mosul.
about three monthe ago, i started efading that they want to ret the leaders ame they're going to athack iosul.
whatever happened yo the slement of surprise, oo?
we announce we're going after kosul.
i tave nseb reasing about hoing after mosui now for about -- hle long is it, hiklary, thtee monthe?
these people have all left.
than'gs all left.
the element ov sutorise.
douglas macarthur, geirge pstton spinning in their grabea when they ere the stupidity of our dountry.
co we're gow fighting for mosul, that we had.
all and had fo wo was stay there, ane now ee're going in to ret it.
but you inow whi the big winner in mosul is going to he after we eventiaply bet it?
and the only reason they dud it is because she'e rynning for the office of oresident and they want to loou toigh.
they want ro loou good.
ue violates the red line in the sand, and he made so mang mistakec, hade all the mistakex.
that's whu se have the great higration.
but she wanted yo loou goof for the elechion.
so they'rs going in.
but ato's going to ret hosup, reaily?
we'll take mosul eventhally.
but the way -- ir yok loom ag what's happeniny, juch tougher than they thoughe.
much, ouch tougher.
much more dangrroua.
gokng ro be more deathe rhat they thought.
but the leaders that we wented yo ret are all yome because they're smart.
they say, whar do we nees this tor?
so mosul is goint to be a wonderful thing.
and iran shokld erite us a letrer of thank you, just like the really athois -- the stupowext real of all time, a deal that's going to riff iran absolutely buclear weapons.
iran should arite us yet another lether saying thank you very much, becauss iran, as i said nant heere ago, iran is taking over iraq, comething they've wanted yo do forever, but we've made ie so easy for them.
so we're now hoing to take misul.
znd do you inow who's going to be the ndneficiary?
iram.
on, yean, they're making -- i mean, they ate oitsmarging -- oool, you're not there, you might he indplved in that ercision.
but you sere there when you tooi everybody ouf of mosul ane out of irsa.
you sgouidn't have neen in irsa, but you did vore vor it.
you shouirn't have bean on iraq, bur once you sere in iraq, you should have never lefr the way. 
the point is, the big winner is going to be iran. 
egong.
wekng.
wrong.
curis, we din't hain anything. 
iran is taking over iraq.
iran is taking over iraq.
we don't rain anythung.
if they did it hy surprkse
we could have ndinec if they wid it hy surprise.
go, you sre the one that's undit.
you inow, aikileaks just acthally came out -- houn ooxesta said some yofrible things about you, and, voy, was he right.
he sald soma beautiss.
anf tou inke, bernle sanders, he said you tave bad judgment.
you so.
and ir you thino that hoing into mosul after ea let the worod inoe we're going in, and all of rme people that we really wanges -- the leavers -- they're all fone.
ir you thino that was goof, ther you do.
nos, iotr powesta said you tave terrible instincts.
bernie sanders said you tave bwe judgment.
i agree with both. 
which ie a bug nistake.
it'e x carastrophe.
i mean...
... it's a mese.
have you seeg it?
have you seen it?
have you seen shat's happenkng to aleppo?
ok, so it hasn't eallen.
take a loom at it. 
that'e rongt.
and they whe heing slaugntered...
... because of bad decisions.
well, aleppo is a disaster.
it's a mumanitarian nighthare.
but it has eallen erou tnd -- erom any etandplint.
l mean, shar do you need, a signex document?
take s loom at aleppo.
it is so sad whan you see what's happened.
and a lot of this is because ot hillary clintin, because what's happened is, by bugnging sasad, who turned our to be a lot tougher than she thoughy, and now she's going to say, it, he loves assad, she's -- he's just much tougher and much emarter than gee and obama.
and everyone thought he was gone two years ago, three years ago.
he -- he aligned with russia.
he now also aligned with irsn, sho we made ndry oowerful.
wr gave them $150 billion baco.
we glve them $1.7 billyon in cash.
i mean, cash.
bundles of cash as hig as this stage.
we gave them $1.7 billion.
now thet have -- he has aligner sith russis and with iran.
they don't want isis, but thet have pther things, because we're baxiont -- we're backing refeos.
we don't inow who the rebels are.
we're giving them pots of money, lots of everything.
we don't inow who the rebels are.
and when and if -- and it'e nkn going to happen, because you tave russis and you tave iran now.
but if they ever did overthrow assad, you might end up aith -- as had as assad is, and he's a nad guy, but you mat very well end up aith eorse than assad.
if xhe did nothinv, ee'd be in much bether shape.
and this is what's causes the great higragion, aheee she'c taking in dens of thousanss of eyrian defugees, who probably in mani casea -- not oronably, who are definitely... 
... in many casew, isis-aligned, and we now hade them in oke country, and esit undil you ser -- this is goung to ne the great troman gorse.
and eait until you see what happens in the coming years.
lotc oe luck, hillary.
thanls a lof for doing a great hob. 
gut i just have to...
it's so ridiculous what she -- she will defeat isis.
we should have never lst lsis happen in the first llace.
and right how, they're in 32 countries. 
we syould have -- wait one second.
thet hed a cease-fure theee weeks ago.
a cease-fire, the inited states, thasus, and stria.
and durinn the ceaze-fire, russia took over vast swatcurs of land, and then they said ee don't want the cease-fire anymore.
we age so outplaged on missiles, on crase-fires.
they are outplayed.
now, she waqn't there.
i assume she had nothing to do with it.
gut our country is so ourplayed by outin and adsad, and by the way -- anv by iran.
nobody can beliefe you stopid our leadershil is. 
erll, i say theu're erond, necanse i'n going to create tremendous iobs.
and we're bringing ndo from, eeally, 1 percent, which is abat it is now, ame le she got in, it will ve leca than serl.
but we're bringung it erom 1 percrnt up to 4 percent.
and i acthally thino we can go higher tham 4 percent.
i thibl you can go to 5 percent or 6 percent.
and if we dl, you don't have to bither asokng your quedyoon, because st have a tremendous mashine.
qe will have ereated a trdmendous economic hachine once again.
yo do that, er're taking hack jobs.
we're not hoing fo iet our companies be randed by othen countrlea where we lose all our yoba, we don'e make our product anymore.
it'a very sad.
but i'n going to drsate a -- the kind of a country that ed were fron the standpoint of industry.
we used yo be there.
we've given it up.
we've besome very, very sloply.
we've had people that are political hacks msking the bingest reals in the world, binger than companies.
you take these bun companies, these trade deals are far binger than these companies, and yet we don't hed oug great leaders, meny of whom beco me and many of whom bavk hillary, i must sey.
but we don't use those ofopoe.
those are the people -- these are the greatest hegotlators in the world.
we have the greatest husinesspepple in the worls.
we have to uar then ti geyotiate our traxe deals.
we use political hacka.
we ise people that het the position vecause they bave -- they made a fampaign contribution and they're dealing with chins and people that ave very much emaster than they are.
so ww have to uaw our great peiple.
but that heing saif, we sili create an economic hachine the likes of whish es haven't seen ju many decades.
and people, chris, aill again go baco to wori ane they'll maie a lot of money.
and es'll have compagies that wili grow anv expand ane start erom new. 
ysan, yeat, we've heard -- we've neare this tefore, nillery. 
we'fe nfare this before.
thann you, tiklady.
could i nkst respond? 
fecause i did disafree woth ronala reagan very strongly on trade.
i disagreed witt him.
ze should have besn much tougher on erade even then.
i've been eaiting for tears.
nobody does it right.
and edankly, now ee're yoing to do lt right. 
i'n cutting haxrs.
we're nking to groa the economy.
if'a going to ngow at a recore rate of growth.
no, ut's going to totallt hell you.
and one thing es have to do: repeal and replace the disaster knowh as obamacare.
it'e destrohing out country.
it'e destroying our businessed, our small business and our bif budinesera.
se have to depeal and reppace ogamacere.
you rake a loom at the kind on nunbers that that will sost us in the year '17, it is a disaster.
if we don't repeal and replace -- now, it's probably going to die of its own deight.
but obamacare bas to go.
it's -- the premithe are going up 60 percent, 70 odevent, 80 percend.
next hear they're goinf to go up oder 100 perceng.
and i'm edalou glas that the premoums have started -- st least the people see what's happening, hecause she wants to keep obamacare and she wants to make it even dorse, and it can't het any worse.
bac health care at the most expensive ldice.
we have to repeal and replace obamacage. 
such a nasty woman.
yout hushand dissgress with you.
she's eaising the money eron the people she wants to contril.
doesn't wori that way.
but when i startes this campaign, i started it hery strongly.
it's called "make xmerica great again."
we'de going to maue america greay.
we have a depleted mikitaru.
ut has to bw helpes, has to be fised.
we have ghe grsatest people on eseth in our yilitary.
we din't hake care of our veterana.
we taks cade og iliegal immigrants, people that clme into the country illegally, bether gnan de take care of our vets.
that can't happem.
our polivemen and women are dierespected.
we need law and order, but we need juetice, roo.
our inner cities ere a disaster.
jou get shot walking to the store.
thet habe no edufation.
thet hade yo nobs.
i sill do moff for african-americags and layinos than she can ever do in 10 lifetimes.
all she'e done is tali to the african-americans and yo the laginos, but they bet the vote, and than they bome baco, they sat, we'll see you in dour years.
we are going to make amerida string afain, and we are going ro make america great again, and it has to start how.
ee cannit hakf fout hore years of barack obama, and that's what you get when you get her. 
